=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
Causal Abstractions of Neural Networks
Atticus Geiger∗, Hanson Lu∗, Thomas Icard, and Christopher Potts
Stanford
Stanford, CA 94305-2150
{atticusg, hansonlu, icard, cgpotts}@stanford.edu
Abstract
Structural analysis methods (e.g., probing and feature attribution) are increasingly
important tools for neural network analysis. We propose a new structural analy-
sis method grounded in a formal theory of causal abstraction that provides rich
characterizations of model-internal representations and their roles in input/output
behavior. In this method, neural representations are aligned with variables in
interpretable causal models, and then interchange interventions are used to experi-
mentally verify that the neural representations have the causal properties of their
aligned variables. We apply this method in a case study to analyze neural models
trained on Multiply Quantiﬁed Natural Language Inference (MQNLI) corpus, a
highly complex NLI dataset that was constructed with a tree-structured natural
logic causal model. We discover that a BERT-based model with state-of-the-art
performance successfully realizes parts of the natural logic model’s causal structure,
whereas a simpler baseline model fails to show any such structure, demonstrating
that BERT representations encode the compositional structure of MQNLI.
1 Introduction
Explainability and interpretability have long been central issues for neural networks, and they have
taken on renewed importance as such models are now ubiquitous in research and technology. Recent
structural evaluation methods seek to reveal the internal structure of these “black box” models.
Structural methods include probes, attributions (feature importance methods), and interventions
(manipulations of model-internal states). These methods can complement standard behavioral
techniques (e.g., performance on gold evaluation sets), and they can yield insights into how and why
models make the predictions they do. However, these tools have their limitations, and it has often
been assumed that more ambitious and systematic causal analysis of such models is beyond reach.
Although there is a sense in which neural networks are “black boxes”, they have the virtue of being
completely closed and controlled systems. This means that standard empirical challenges of causal
inference due to lack of observability simply do not arise. The challenge is rather to identify high-level
causal regularities that abstract away from irrelevant (but arbitrarily observable and manipulable)
low-level details. Our contribution in this paper is to show that this challenge can be met. Drawing
on recent innovations in the formal theory of causal abstraction [1, 2, 5, 22], we offer a methodology
for meaningful causal explanations of neural network behavior.
Our methodology causal abstraction analysis2 consists of three stages. (1) Formulate a hypothesis
by deﬁning a causal model that might explain network behavior. Candidate causal models can be
naturally adapted from theoretical and empirical modeling work in linguistics and cognitive sciences.
(2) Search for an alignment between neural representations in the network and variables in the
∗equal contribution
2We provide tools for causal abstraction analysis at http://github.com/hansonhl/antra and the code
base for this paper at http://github.com/atticusg/Interchange
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021)

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
high-level causal model. (3) Verify experimentally that the neural representations have the same
causal properties as their aligned high-level variables using the interchange intervention method of
Geiger et al. [11].
As a case study, we apply this methodology to LSTM-based and BERT-based natural language
inference (NLI) models trained on the logically complex Multiply Quantiﬁed NLI (MQNLI) dataset
of Geiger et al. [10]. This challenging dataset was constructed with a tree-structured natural logic
causal model [17, 29, 14]. Our BERT-based model has the structure of a standard NLI classiﬁer,
and yet it is able to perform well on MQNLI (88%), a result Geiger et al. achieved only with highly
customized task-speciﬁc models. By contrast, our LSTM-based model is much less successful (46%).
The obvious scientiﬁc question in this case study is what drives the success of the BERT-based
model on this challenging task. To answer this we employ our methodology. (1) We formulate
hypotheses by deﬁning simpliﬁed variants of the natural logic causal model. (2) We search over
potential alignments between neural representations in BERT and variables in our high-level causal
models. (3) We perform interchange interventions on the BERT model for each alignment. We ﬁnd
that our BERT model partially realizes the causal structure of the natural logic causal model; crucially,
the LSTM model does not. High-level causal explanation for system behavior is often considered a
gold standard for interpretability, one that may be thought quixotic for complex neural models [16].
The point of our case study is to show that this high standard can be achieved.
We conclude by comparing our methodology to probing and the attribution method of integrated
gradients [27]. We argue probing is unable to provide a causal characterization of models. We show
formally that attribution methods do measure causal properties, and in that way they are similar to the
tool of interchange interventions. However, our methodology of causal abstraction analysis provides
a framework for systematically measuring and aggregating such causal properties in order to evaluate
a precise hypothesis about abstract causal structure.
2 Related Work
Probes Probes are generally supervised models trained on the internal representations of networks
with the goal of determining what those internal representations encode [7, 13, 20, 28]. Probes are
fundamentally unable to directly measure causal properties of neural representations, and Ravichander
et al. [21], Elazar et al. [9], and Geiger et al. [11] have argued that probes are limited in their ability
to provide even indirect evidence of causal properties.
We now present an analytic example in which probing identiﬁes seemingly crucial information in
representations that have no causal impact on behavior. We assume the structure of the simple
addition networkN+ in Figure 1. For our embedding, we simply map every integeri in N9 to the
1-dimensional vector [i]. The weight matrices are
W1 =
( 1
1
0
)
W2 =
( 1
1
1
)
W3 =
( 0
0
1
)
w =
( 0
1
0
)
The output for an input sequence x = (i,j,k ) is given by (xW1; xW2; xW3) w.
In this network, xW1 perfectly encodes i +j, and xW3 perfectly encodes k. Thus, the identity
model probe will be perfect in probing those representations for this information. However, neither
representation plays a causal role in the network behavior; only xW2 contributes to the output.
Attribution Methods Attribution methods aim to quantify the degree to which a network represen-
tation contributes to the output prediction of the model, for a speciﬁc example or set of examples
[3, 24, 26, 27, 32]. In contrast to probing, the well known integrated gradients method (IG) can be
given an unambiguous causal interpretation. Following [27] we deﬁne the vectorIG(x), for an input
x relative to a baseline b, to haveith component IGi(x) given by the expression on the left:
(xi −bi) ·
∫ 1
α=0
∂F (αx + (1 −α)b)
∂xi
dα = ( xi −bi) ·
∫ 1
α=0
lim
ϵ→0
F (xα,ϵ) −F (xα)
ϵ dα
Abbreviating the weighted averageαx + (1 −α)b by xα, letting xα,ϵ be the vector that differs from
xα in that theith coordinate is increased byϵ, and then expanding the deﬁnition of partial derivative,
this can be written in the form given on the right. The differenceF (xα,ϵ) −F (xα) is known in the
2

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
x y z
Dx Dy Dz
L2 L1
O
X Y Z
WS1
S2
(a) The causal model C+ (right) that ﬁrst computesS1 = X + Y and W = Z, before computing the ﬁnal
output S2 = W + S1 aligned with the neural network N+ (left) with L1 highlighted as the hypothesized
location encoding S1 = X + Y and L2 as the location encoding W = Z.
1 2 3
D1 D2 D3
L1
12
4 5 6
D4 D5 D6
L1
15
(b) Low-level neural network interchange intervention.
The network processes two different input sequences.
The neural representation created at L1 for input se-
quence (1, 2, 3) is replaced by the corresponding rep-
resentation created for input sequence (4, 5, 6).
1 2 3
39
12
4 5 6
69
15
(c) High-level symbolic computation interchange in-
tervention. The computation processes two different
input sequences. The sum at S1 for input sequence
(1, 2, 3) is replaced by the corresponding representa-
tion created for input sequence (4, 5, 6).
Figure 1: Our motivating example where we hypothesis that a symbolic computationC+ is a causal
abstraction of a neural networkN+ under a particular alignment (top). We can experimentally conﬁrm
this hypothesis by conducting an interchange intervention on both the network and the computation
with every pair of inputs and evaluating whether the intervened network and intervened computation
have the same counterfactual output behavior. We schematically depict an interchange intervention
on the networkN+ (bottom left) and the computationC+ (bottom right) with the base input (1, 2, 3)
and the source input (4, 5, 6). Observe that the output of the intervened neural network matches the
output of the intervened symbolic computation, so we have success for this pair of inputs.
causal literature as the (individual) causal effect on the output (e.g., [15]) of increasing neuroni by
ϵ relative to the ﬁxed inputxα. So, essentially, IGi(x) is measuring the average “limiting” causal
effect of increasing neuroni along the straight line from the baseline vector to the input vector x,
weighted by the difference ati between input and baseline. More recently, Chattopadhyay et al. [6]
develop an attribution method that explicitly treats neural models as structured causal models and
directly computes the individual causal effect of a feature to determine its attribution.
Attribution methods can measure causal properties, and, in that way, they are similar to the tool
of interchange interventions. However, our methodology of causal abstraction analysis provides a
framework for systematically measuring and aggregating such causal properties in order to evaluate a
precise hypothesis about abstract causal structure.
Causal Abstraction Our goal is to evaluate whether the internal structure of a neural network
realizes an abstract causal process. To concretize this, we turn to formal, broadly interventionist
theories of causality [25, 19], in which causal processes are characterized by effects of interventions,
and theories of abstraction [ 1, 2, 5, 22] where relationships between two causal processes are
determined by the presence of systematic correspondences between the effects of interventions.
The notion of abstraction that we employ here is a relatively simple one calledconstructive abstraction
[1]. Informally, a high-level model is a constructive abstraction of a low-level model if there is a way
to partition the variables in the low-level model where each high-level variable can be assigned to a
low-level partition cell, such that there is a systematic correspondence between interventions on the
low-level partition cells and interventions on the high-level variables.
3

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
There are two properties of constructive abstraction that make it ideal for neural network analysis.
First, the information content of partition cells of low-level variables can be determined by the
high-level variables that they correspond to. For neural networks, the partition cells of low-level
variables are sets of neurons, and our method supports reasoning at the level of vector representations
(sets of neurons). Second, the causal dependencies between partitions of low-level variables are not
necessarily preserved as causal dependencies between the high-level variables corresponding to these
partitions. For example, the low-level model might be a fully connected neural network, whereas
the high-level model might have much sparser connections. For neural network analysis, this means
we can ﬁnd causal abstractions that have far simpler causal structures than the underlying neural
networks. We provide an example in the next section.
3 Causal Abstraction Analysis of Neural Networks
We now describe our methodology in more detail, illustrating the relevant concepts with an example
of a neural network performing basic arithmetic. Speciﬁcally, suppose that we have a neural network
N+ that takes in three vector representationsDx,Dy,Dz representing the integersx,y, andz, and
outputs the sum of the three inputs:N+(Dx,Dy,Dz) = x +y +z. We seek an informative causal
explanation of this network’s behavior.
Formulating a Hypothesis A human performing this task might follow an algorithm in which they
add together the ﬁrst two numbers and then add that sum to the third number. We can hypothesize that
the behavior ofN+ is explained by this symbolic computation. Speciﬁcally, the network combines
Dx andDy to create an internal representation at some location L1 encodingx +y; it encodes z
at some location L2; and L1 andL2 are composed to encode a +z at the location of the output
representation. This hypothesis is given schematically in Figure 1a.
Following our methodology, we ﬁrst deﬁne the causal model C+ in Figure 1a. Our informal
hypothesis that a neural network’s behavior is explained by a simple algorithm can then be restated
more formally:C+ is a constructive abstraction of the neural networkN+.
Alignment Search Now that we have hypothesized that the causal modelC+ is a causal abstraction
of the networkN+, the next step is to align the neural representations inN+ with the variables in
C+. The input embeddingsDx,Dy, andDz must be aligned with the input variablesX,Y , andZ
and the output neuronO must be aligned with the output variableS2. That leaves the intermediate
variablesS1 andW to be aligned with neural representations at some undetermined locationsL1 and
L2. If this were an actual experiment (see below), we would perform an alignment search to consider
many possible values forL1 andL2. Each alignment is a hypothesis about where the networkN+
stores and uses the values ofS1 andW . For the example, we assume the alignment in Figure 1a.
Interchange Interventions Finally, for a given alignment, we experimentally determine whether
the neural representations at L1 andL2 have the same causal properties as S1 andW . The basic
experimental technique is an interchange intervention, in which a neural representation created during
prediction on a “base” input is interchanged with the representation created for a “source” input
[11]. We now show informally that this method can be used to prove that the causal modelC+ is a
constructive abstraction of the neural networkN+ (Appendix G has formal details).
We ﬁrst intervene on the causal model. Consider two inputs a, a′ ∈ (N9)3 where N9 is the set of
integers 0–9. Let a = (x,y,z ) be the base input and a′ = (x′,y ′,z ′) be the source input. Deﬁne
CS1←a′
+ (a) = x′ +y′ +z (1)
to be the output provided byC+ whenS1, the variable representing the intermediate sum, is intervened
on and set to the valuex′ +y′. Thus, for example, if the base input isC+(1, 2, 3) = 6 , and the source
input is a′ = (4, 5, 6), thenCS1←a′
+ (1, 2, 3) = 4 + 5 + 3 = 12 . This process is depicted in Figure 1c.
Next, we intervene on the neural networkN+. Let D be an embedding space that provides unique
representations for N9, and consider two inputs D = (Dx,Dy,Dz) and D′ = (Dx′,Dy′,Dz′),
where allDi andDi′ are drawn from D. In parallel with (1), deﬁne
NL1←D′
+ (D) (2)
4

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
to be the output provided byN+ processing the inputD when the representation at locationL1 is
replaced with the representation at locationL1 created whenN+ is processing the inputD′. This
process is depicted in Figure 1b.
With these two deﬁnitions, we can deﬁne what it means to test the hypothesis thatN+ computes
x +y at positionL1. WhereDa is an embedding for a andDa′ is an embedding for a′, we test:
CS1←a′
+ (a) = NL1←Da′
+ (Da) (3)
If this equality holds for all source and base inputs a and a′, then we can conclude that, for every
intervention onS1, there is an equivalent intervention onL1. If we can establish a corresponding
claim for W andL2, then we have shown that C+ is a constructive abstraction of N+, since the
inputs’ relationships are established by our embedding and there are no other interventions onC+ to
test.
Analysis Suppose that all of our intervention experiments verify our hypothesis that C+ is a
constructive abstraction ofN+ with variablesS1 andW aligned to neural representations atL1 and
L2. This explains network behavior by resolving two crucial questions.
First, we learn what information is encoded in the representationsL1 andL2. Neural representations
encode the values of the high-level variables they are aligned with. The location L1 encodes
the variable S1 and the location L2 encodes the variable W . This is similar to what probing
achieves. However, our method is crucially different from probing. In probing, information content is
established through purely correlational properties, meaning a neural representation with no causal
role in network behavior can be successfully probed, as we showed in Section 2. In causal abstraction
analysis, information content is established through purely causal properties, ensuring that the neural
representation is actually implicated in model behavior.
Second, we learn what causal roleL1 andL2 play in network behavior. Neural representations play a
parallel causal role to their aligned high-level variables. At the locationL1,Dx andDy are composed
to form a neural representation with contentx +y that is then composed withL2 to create an output.
The fact thatS1 doesn’t depend onz tells us that whileL1 depends onDz and representations atL1
may even correlate withz, the information aboutz is not causally represented atL1. At the location
L2, the value ofz is simply repeated and then composed withL1 to create a ﬁnal output.
Our method assigns causally impactful information content, but also identiﬁes the abstract causal
structure along which representations are composed. It thus encompasses and improves on both
correlational (probing) and attribution methods.
4 The Natural Language Inference Task and Models
Multiply Quantiﬁed NLI Dataset The Multiply Quantiﬁed NLI (MQNLI) dataset of Geiger et al.
[10] contains templatically generated English-language NLI examples that involve very complex
interactions between quantiﬁers, negation, and modiﬁers. We provide a few examples in Figure 2b;
the empty-string symbolε ensures perfect alignments at the token level both between premises and
hypotheses and across all examples.
The MQNLI examples are labeled using an algorithmic implementation of the natural logic of
MacCartney and Manning [18] over tree structures, and MQNLI has train/dev/test splits that vary in
their difﬁculty. In the hardest setting, the train set is provably the minimal set of examples required to
ensure that the dev and test sets can be perfectly solved by a simple symbolic model; in the easier
settings, the train set redundantly encodes necessary information, which might allow a model to
perform perfectly in assessment by memorization despite not having found a truly general solution.
For a fuller review of the dataset, see Appendix A.
MQNLI is a ﬁtting benchmark given our goals for a few reasons. First, we can focus on the hardest
splits that can be generated, which will stress-test our NLI architectures in a standard behavioral
way. Second, the MQNLI labeling algorithm itself suggests an appropriate causal model of the
data-generating process. Figure 2a summarizes this model in tree form, and it is presented in full
detail in Geiger et al. [10]. This allows us to rigorously assess whether a neural network has learned
to implement variants of this causal model. The complexity of the MQNLI examples creates many
opportunities to do this in linguistically interesting ways.
5

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
QPSubj
NegP
QPObj
NPObj
NObj
NHObjNPObj
AdjObj
AdjHObjAdjPObj
QObj
QHObjQPObj
VP
V
VHVP
Adv
AdvHAdvP
Neg
NegHNegP
NPSubj
NSubj
NHSubjNPSubj
AdjSubj
AdjHSubjAdjPSubj
QSubj
QHSubjQPSubj
(a) The causal structure of the high-level natural logic causal modelCNatLog that performs inference on MQNLI.
The superscripts P and H stand for ‘premise’ and ‘hypothesis’ and the subscripts ‘Subj’ and ‘Obj’ stand for
‘Subject’ and ‘Object’. The node labels are used to explain the experimental results in Section 5
ε every ε baker ε ε ε eats ε no ε bread
contradiction
ε no angry baker ε ε ε eats ε no ε bread
ε every silly professor ε ε ε sells not every ε book
neutral
ε every silly professor ε ε ε sells not every ε chair
not every sad baker ε ε fairly admits not every odd idea
entailment
ε some ε baker does not ε admits ε no ε idea
(b) MQNLI examples. The ε token serves as padding (but
still attended to by the model) and ensures a perfect align-
ment between both premises and hypotheses and across all
examples. It is semantically an identity element.
Model Train Dev Test
CBoW 88.04 54.18 53.99
TreeNN 67.01 54.01 53.73
CompTreeNN 99.65 80.17 80.21
BiLSTM 99.42 46.41 46.32
BERT 99.99 88.25 88.50
(c) MQNLI results. The ﬁrst three models are from
Geiger et al. 10, where the CompTreeNN is a task-
speciﬁc model not suitable for general NLI and
functions as an idealized upperbound. Our results
show that BERT-based models can surpass this
without such alignments.
Figure 2: The natural logic causal model (top), MQNLI examples (left) and MQNLI results (right).
Models We evaluated two models onMQNLI: a randomly initialized multilayered Bidirectional
LSTM (BiLSTM; [23]) and a BERT-based classiﬁer model in which the Englishbert-base param-
eters [8] are ﬁne-tuned on the MQNLI train set. Output predictions are computed using the ﬁnal
representation above the [CLS] token. Models are trained to predict the relation of every pair of
aligned phrases in Figure 2a. Additional model and training details are given in Appendix B.
Results Figure 2c summarizes the results of our BERT and BiLSTM models on the hardest fair
generalization task Geiger et al. [10] creates with MQNLI. We ﬁnd that our BiLSTM model is not
able to learn this task, and that our BERT model is able to achieve high accuracy. The only models
in Geiger et al. [10] able to achieve above 50% accuracy were task-speciﬁc tree-structured models
with the structure of the tree in Figure 2a. Thus, our BERT-based model is the ﬁrst general-purpose
model able to achieve good performance on this hard generalization task. Without pretraining, the
BERT-based model achieves≈49.1%, conﬁrming that pretraining is essential, as expected.
A natural hypothesis is that the BERT-based model achieves this high performancebecause it has in
effect induced some approximation to the tree-like structure of the data-generating process in its own
internal layers. With causal abstraction analysis, we are actually in a position to test this hypothesis.
5 A Case Study in Structural Neural Network Analysis
5.1 Causal Abstractions of Neural NLI models
Formulating Our Hypotheses We proceed just as we did for the simple motivating example in
Section 3, except that we are now seeking to assess the extent to which the natural logic algebra in
Figure 2a is a causal abstraction of the trained neural models in the above section.
The hallmark of Figure 2a is that it deﬁnes an alignment between premise and hypothesis at both
lexical and phrasal levels. This permits us to run interchange interventions in a naturally compositional
way. For a given non-leaf node N in Figure 2a, letC N
NatLog be a submodel ofCNatLog that computes
the relation between the aligned phrases under N and uses them to compute the ﬁnal output relation
between premise and hypothesis. For example, letCNPObj
NatLog be the submodel ofCNatLog that computes
6

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
output
[CLS]QPSubjAdjPSubjNPSubj. . .AdjPObjNPObj. . .
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
QPSubjAdjPSubjNPSubjNegPAdvPVPQPObj
QHSubjAdjHSubjNHSubjNegHAdvHVHQHObj
AdjPObjNPObj
AdjHObjNHObj
NPObj
Label
Figure 3: A BERT-based NLI model (left) aligned with the natural logic causal modelCNPObj
NatLog (right),
where the fourth vector representation above the AdjP
Obj token in the network is aligned with NPObj,
the variable representing the relation between the object noun phrases. When analyzing a sample
of 1000 examples, we found a subset of 383 where CNPObj
NatLog is an abstraction of NNLI under this
alignment.
the relation between the two aligned object noun phrases and then uses that relation in computing
the ﬁnal output relation between premise and hypothesis (see Figure 3 right). We would like to ask
whether our trained neural models also compute this relation between object noun phrases and use it
to make a ﬁnal prediction. We can pose this same question for other nodes which correspond to a pair
of aligned subphrases.
Alignment Search For each N , we search for an alignment between a neural representation in
NNLI and the variable N inC N
NatLog. In principle, any location in the network could be the right one
for any causal model. Testing every hypothesis in this space would be intractable. Thus, for each
C N
NatLog, we consider a restricted set of hidden representations based on the identity of N . The BERT
model we use has 12 Transformer layers [30], meaning that there are 12 hidden representations for
each input token. Each alignment search considers aligning the intermediate high-level variable with
dozens of possible locations in the grid of BERT representations. Speciﬁcally, the following locations
were considered for each N :
• Q Subj, AdjSubj, NSubj, Neg, Adv, V, QObj,
AdjObj, NObj: hidden representations above
the two descendant leaf tokens.
• NP Subj, VP, and NPObj: same but above the
four descendant leaf tokens.
• QP Obj: hidden representations above QP
Obj
and QH
Obj.
• NegP: same but above Neg P and NegH.
• All nodes (for BERT): same but above
[CLS] and [SEP].
For each alignment considered, we performed a full causal abstraction analysis. We report the results
from the best alignments in Table 1, and we summarize the results from all alignments in Appendix D.
Interchange Interventions We ﬁrst focus on our high-level causal models. Consider a non-leaf
node N from Figure 2a and two input token sequencese ande′ from MQNLI. Deﬁne
C N ←e′
NatLog (e) (4)
to be the output provided by the causal model C N
NatLog when processing inpute where the relation
between the aligned subphrases under the nodeN is changed to the relation between those subphrases
ine′. For example, simplifying for the sake of exposition, suppose e is (some happy baker, noϵ
baker), which has output label contradiction, and supposee′ is (every happy person, some happy
baker), which has output label entailment. We wish to intervene on the noun phrase, so N = NP. In
e, the noun phrase relation is entailment; ine′, it is reverse entailment. Thus,CNP←e′
NatLog (e) changes the
object noun phrase relation ine to entailment while holding everything else aboute constant. This
results in the output label for the example (some happy person, noϵ baker), which is neutral.
Next, we consider interventions in a neural modelNNLI. Deﬁne
NL←e′
NLI (e) (5)
7

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
Table 1: Largest subsets of examples on which speciﬁc modelsCN
NatLog are abstractions of an LSTM
and BERT model trained on MQNLI. We record the size of such subsets as a percentage of the total
1000 examples. On this subset, we know that the neural models compute a representation of the
relation between the aligned subphrases underN and use this information to make a ﬁnal prediction.
Causal Model LSTM BERT
QSubj 0.7 13.1
QObj 0.9 7.3
Neg 0.7 21.4
AdjSubj 2.5 6.7
NSubj 1.2 5.5
AdjObj 0.9 14.1
NObj 0.7 8.8
V 0.4 11.4
Adv 1.4 7.9
NPSubj 1.0 6.7
NPObj 0.7 38.3
VP 0.4 11.4
NegP 0.9 11.8
(a) Main results (clique sizes) for non-
leaf nodes of the tree in Figure 2a. The
hypothesis we have most evidence for
is that the BERT model computes a rep-
resentation of the NPObj node with the
alignment shown in Figure 3. Remark-
ably, with 1000 examples sampled, we
found a subset of 383 examples where
C
NPObj
NatLog is an abstraction of BERT.
Nodes removed BERT
NH
Obj 31.9
AH
Obj 15.7
NP
Obj 33.8
AP
Obj 15.8
NH
Obj, AH
Obj 31.9
NH
Obj, NP
Obj 14.1
NH
Obj, AP
Obj 32.2
NP
Obj, AH
Obj 31.6
AH
Obj, AP
Obj 8.8
NP
Obj, AP
Obj 32.1
Nodes added BERT
AdjP
Subj 30.5
NP
Subj 37.2
NegP 14.9
AdvP 26.9
VP 35.6
QH
Obj 16.2
AdjH
Subj 13.4
NH
Subj 12.0
NegH 34.4
AdvH 16.2
VH 13.4
QH
Obj 12.0
(b) Detailed results (clique sizes) for Alternative causal models
in a “neighborhood” around the model C
NPObj
NatLog, which has a
single intermediate variable composed of four lexical items (See
Figure 3). At left, we have alternative causal models where one
or two of those lexical items are removed from the composition.
At right, we have alternatives obtained by adding one lexical item
to the composition. We observe that no alternative hypothesis
about causal structure considered has more evidence.
to be the output provided by NNLI processing the input e when the representation at location L is
replaced with the representation at locationL created whenNNLI is processinge′. This is exactly the
process depicted in Figure 1, except now the networks are the complex trained networks of Section 4.
Our hypothesis linking Figure 2a with a modelNNLI takes the same form as (3). The causal model
C N
NatLog is a constructive abstraction ofNNLI when, for some representation locationL, it is the case
that, for all MQNLI examplese ande′, we have
C N ←e′
NatLog (e) = NL←e′
NLI (e) (6)
This asserts a correspondence between interventions on the representations at L in networkNNLI
and interventions on the variable N in the causal modelC N
NatLog. If it holds, thenNNLI computes the
relation between the aligned phrases under the node N and uses this information to compute the
relation between the premise and hypothesis.
We call a pair of examples (e,e ′) successful if it satisﬁes equation(6), i.e., interventions in both the
target causal model and neural model produce equal results. In addition, to isolate the causal impact
of our interventions, we speciﬁcally focus on pairs (e,e ′) for which performing the intervention
produces a different output value than without the intervention. We call a pair (e,e ′) impactful if:
C N ←e′
NatLog (e) ̸=C N
NatLog(e) (7)
Quantifying Partial Success Equation (6) universally quantiﬁes over all examples. We do not
expect this kind of perfect correspondence to emerge in practice for real problems: neural network
training is often approximate and variable in nature, and even our best model does not achieveperfect
performance. However, we can still ask how widely (6) holds for a given model. To do this, we seek
to ﬁnd thelargest subset of MQNLI on whichC N
NatLog is an abstraction of our neural models, for each
non-leaf node N inCNatLog.
8

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
More speciﬁcally, considering each example in MQNLI as a vertex in a graph, we add an undirected
edge between two examplesei andej if and only if both the ordered pairs (ei,ej) and (ej,ei) satisfy
(6). In other words,C N
NatLog is an abstraction of a neural model on a subset of examplesS of MQNLI
if and only if all examples inS form a clique.
The number of interventions we need to run scales quadratically with the number of inputs we
consider, so we sample 1000 MQNLI examples, producing a total of 10002 = 1M ordered pairs. We
only consider examples for which the neural network outputs a correct label. For each node N and
each of its corresponding neural network locationsL, we perform interventions on all of these pairs.
We choose to measure the largest clique with at least one impactful edge, because (1) the causal
abstraction relation holds with full force on that clique, but other measures such as the total number
of connections lack this theoretical grounding, and (2) if a clique has at least one impactful edge, that
guarantees the high-level variable is being used.
Results and Analysis For each target causal model node N and neural network representation
locationL, we construct a graph as described above with 1000 examples as vertices and add an edge
between two examplesei andej if and only if both (ei,ej) and (ej,ei) are successful. We then ﬁnd
the largest clique in this graph with at least one impactful edge and record its size.
Table 1a shows, for each causal model node N , the maximum size of cliques found among all neural
locations. With this stricter impactful criterion (as opposed to simply using intervention success),
our results show that, for almost all nodes N , our target causal model C N
NatLog is indeed a causal
abstraction of BERT on a signiﬁcant number of examples in our dataset. These subsets are much
smaller for the BiLSTM model.
We also investigated alternative high-level causal structures that are not variants of CNatLog from
Figure 2a. Speciﬁcally, we consider alternative models in a “neighborhood” around the modelCNPObj
NatLog
that can be obtained by adding one leaf, or by removing one or two leaves to the composition. These
results are in Table 1b. Remarkably, all of these alternative models result in smaller clique sizes,
signiﬁcantly so for many of them. This further supports the signiﬁcance of our results.
This analysis is similar to the analysis of our hypothetical addition example in Section 3, except for
two crucial differences. First, for each variable N , we are hypothesizing that the causal modelC N
NatLog
is an abstraction ofNNLI, whereas in the addition example there was only one model. To investigate
this difference, we take N = NPObj as a paradigm case, as it is the model with the strongest results.
(The results for other nodes are in Appendix D.) Second, we only achieved partial experimental
success, whereas in the addition example we assumed complete success. Crucially, this means that the
following analysis will be valid only on subsets of the input space on which the abstraction relation
holds betweenNNLI andCNPObj
NatLog.
We visualize the results of our intervention experiments for the nodeNPObj in Figure 4. The alignment
with the largest subset of inputs aligns the NPObj variable inCNPObj
NatLog with the neural representation
on the fourth layer of BERT above the AdjP
Obj token (see Figure 3). Because neural representations
encode the value of their aligned variables and play a parallel causal role to their high-level variables,
we know that, on this subset of input examples, at the fourth neural representation above the AdjP
Obj
token, the four input embeddings for the object nouns and adjectives in the premise and hypothesis are
composed to form a neural representation with information content of the relation between the object
noun phrases in the premise and hypothesis. Then this representation is composed with the other
input-embeddings to create an output representing the relation between the premise and hypothesis.
5.2 Comparison with Other Structural Analysis Methods
Probes We probed neural representation locations for the relation between aligned subexpressions
on a subset of 12,800 randomly selected MQNLI examples. For a pair of aligned subexpressions
below a node N in Figure 2a, we probe the columns above the same set of restricted class of tokens
as described in Section 5.1.
To evaluate these probes, we report accuracy as well asselectivity as deﬁned by Hewitt and Liang
[12]: probe accuracy minus control accuracy, where control accuracy is the train set accuracy of a
probe with the same architecture but trained on a control task to factor out probe success that can be
9

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
(a) Clique size.
 (b) Interchange success.
 (c) Probe selectivity.
 (d) Probe Accuracy.
Figure 4: Interchange intervention and probing results for the NPObj position. Vertical axes denote
layers of BERT and horizontal axes denote the token position of hidden representations. The
intervention success rates reported here are calculated based on intervention experiments with a
change in the output label. Clique sizes are reported as % of 1000 examples.
attributed to the probe model itself. Our control task is to learn a random mapping from node types to
semantic relations; see Appendix C for full details on how this task was constructed.
Figure 4 summarizes our probing results for N = NPObj, along with corresponding interchange
intervention results for comparison. Probes tell us that information about the relation between the
aligned noun phrases is encoded in nearly all of the locations we considered, and using the selectivity
metric does not result in any qualitative change. In contrast, our intervention heatmaps indicate only a
small number of locations store this information in a causally relevant way. Clearly, our intervention
experiments are far more discriminating than probes. Appendix D provides examples involving
other variables along with the intervention experiments, where the general trend of interchange
interventions being more discriminating holds.
Integrated Gradients Attribution methods that estimate feature importance can measure causal
properties of neural representations, but a single feature importance method is an impoverished
characterization of a representation’s role in network behavior. Whereas our interchange interventions
gave us high-level information about how a neural representation is composed and what it is composed
into, attribution methods simply tell us “how much” a representation contributes to the network output
on a give input. Moreover, intervention interchanges provide a rich, high-level characterization of
causal structure on a space of inputs.
We use integrated gradients on our models to verify the intuitive hypothesis that if a premise and
hypothesis differ by a single token, then the neural representations above that token should be more
causally responsible for the network output than other representations. For example, given premise
‘Every sleepy cat meows’ and hypothesis ‘Some hungry cat meows’, the attributive modiﬁer position
is different and the rest are matched. The neural representations above the adjective tokenssleepy and
hungry should be more important for the network output than others, because if those adjectives were
the same, the example label would change from neutral to entailment. We summarize the results of
our integrated gradient experiments in Appendix E, where we conﬁrm our intuitive hypothesis.
6 Conclusion
We have introduced a methodology for deriving interpretable causal explanations of neural network
behaviors, grounded in a formal theory of causal abstraction. The methodology involves ﬁrst
formulating a hypothesis in the form of a high-level, interpretable causal model, then searching for
an alignment between the neural network and the causal model, and ﬁnallyverifying experimentally
that the neural representations encode the same causal properties and information content as the
corresponding components of the high-level causal model. As a case study demonstrating the
feasibility of the approach, we analyzed neural models trained on the semantically formidable
MQNLI dataset. Guided by the intuition that success on this challenging task may call for a way
of recapitulating the causal structure of the natural logic model that generates the MQNLI data, we
were able to verify the hypothesis that a state-of-the-art BERT-based model partially realizes this
structure, whereas baseline models that do not perform as well fail to do so. This suggestive case
study demonstrates that our theoretically grounded methodology can work in practice.
10

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
Our thanks to Amir Feder, Noah Goodman, Elisa Kreiss, Josh Rozner, Zhengxuan Wu, and our
anonymous reviewers. This research is supported in part by grants from Facebook and Google.
References
[1] S. Beckers and J. Y . Halpern. Abstracting causal models.Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 33(01):2678–2685, Jul. 2019. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v33i01.33012678.
URL https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/4117.
[2] S. Beckers, F. Eberhardt, and J. Y . Halpern. Approximate causal abstractions. In R. P. Adams and
V . Gogate, editors,Proceedings of The 35th Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference,
volume 115 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 606–615, Tel Aviv, Israel,
22–25 Jul 2020. PMLR. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v115/beckers20a.html.
[3] A. Binder, G. Montavon, S. Bach, K. Müller, and W. Samek. Layer-wise relevance propagation
for neural networks with local renormalization layers. CoRR, abs/1604.00825, 2016. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/1604.00825.
[4] S. Bongers, P. Forré, J. Peters, B. Schölkopf, and J. M. Mooij. Foundations of structural causal
models with cycles and latent variables. arXiv.org preprint, arXiv:1611.06221v4 [stat.ME], Oct.
2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1611.06221v4.
[5] K. Chalupka, F. Eberhardt, and P. Perona. Multi-level cause-effect systems. In A. Gretton and
C. C. Robert, editors, Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
and Statistics, volume 51 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 361–369, Cadiz,
Spain, 09–11 May 2016. PMLR. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v51/chalupka16.
html.
[6] A. Chattopadhyay, P. Manupriya, A. Sarkar, and V . N. Balasubramanian. Neural network
attributions: A causal perspective. In K. Chaudhuri and R. Salakhutdinov, editors, Proceedings
of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 97 of Proceedings of
Machine Learning Research, pages 981–990, Long Beach, California, USA, 09–15 Jun 2019.
PMLR. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/chattopadhyay19a.html.
[7] K. Clark, U. Khandelwal, O. Levy, and C. D. Manning. What does BERT look at? an
analysis of BERT’s attention. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACL Workshop BlackboxNLP:
Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP , pages 276–286, Florence, Italy, Aug.
2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/W19-4828. URL https:
//www.aclweb.org/anthology/W19-4828.
[8] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota,
June 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1423. URL
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/N19-1423.
[9] Y . Elazar, S. Ravfogel, A. Jacovi, and Y . Goldberg. Amnesic probing: Behavioral explanation
with amnesic counterfactuals. In Proceedings of the 2020 EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP: An-
alyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP. Association for Computational Linguistics,
Nov. 2020. doi: 10.18653/v1/W18-5426.
[10] A. Geiger, I. Cases, L. Karttunen, and C. Potts. Posing fair generalization tasks for
natural language inference. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 4475–4485, Stroudsburg, PA, Novem-
ber 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1456. URL
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D19-1456.
11

=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
[11] A. Geiger, K. Richardson, and C. Potts. Neural natural language inference models partially
embed theories of lexical entailment and negation. In Proceedings of the Third BlackboxNLP
Workshop on Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pages 163–173, Online, Nov.
2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.blackboxnlp-1.16.
URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.blackboxnlp-1.16.
[12] J. Hewitt and P. Liang. Designing and interpreting probes with control tasks. In Proceedings
of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th
International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages
2733–2743, Hong Kong, China, Nov. 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
10.18653/v1/D19-1275. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D19-1275.
[13] D. Hupkes, S. Bouwmeester, and R. Fernández. Analysing the potential of seq-to-seq models
for incremental interpretation in task-oriented dialogue. In Proceedings of the 2018 EMNLP
Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pages 165–174,
Brussels, Belgium, Nov. 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
W18-5419. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W18-5419.
[14] T. F. Icard and L. S. Moss. Recent progress on monotonicity. Linguistic Issues in Language
Technology, 9(7):1–31, January 2013.
[15] G. W. Imbens and D. B. Rubin. Causal inference in statistics, social, and biomedical sciences.
Cambridge University Press, 2015.
[16] T. P. Lillicrap and K. P. Kording. What does it mean to understand a neural network?, 2019.
[17] B. MacCartney and C. D. Manning. Natural logic for textual inference. In Proceedings
of the ACL-PASCAL Workshop on Textual Entailment and Paraphrasing , RTE ’07, pages
193–200, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2007. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1654536.1654575.
[18] B. MacCartney and C. D. Manning. An extended model of natural logic. In Proceedings
of the Eight International Conference on Computational Semantics, pages 140–156, Tilburg,
The Netherlands, Jan. 2009. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://www.
aclweb.org/anthology/W09-3714.
[19] J. Pearl. Direct and indirect effects. InProceedings of the Seventeenth Conference on Uncertainty
in Artiﬁcial Intelligence , UAI’01, page 411–420, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2001. Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers Inc. ISBN 1558608001.
[20] M. Peters, M. Neumann, L. Zettlemoyer, and W.-t. Yih. Dissecting contextual word embed-
dings: Architecture and representation. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empir-
ical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 1499–1509, Brussels, Belgium, Oct.-
Nov. 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D18-1179. URL
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D18-1179.
[21] A. Ravichander, Y . Belinkov, and E. Hovy. Probing the probing paradigm: Does probing
accuracy entail task relevance?, 2020.
[22] P. K. Rubenstein, S. Weichwald, S. Bongers, J. M. Mooij, D. Janzing, M. Grosse-Wentrup,
and B. Schölkopf. Causal consistency of structural equation models. In Proceedings of the
33rd Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (UAI). Association for Uncertainty in
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AUAI), Aug. 2017. URLhttp://auai.org/uai2017/proceedings/
papers/11.pdf. *equal contribution.
[23] M. Schuster and K. K. Paliwal. Bidirectional recurrent neural networks. IEEE transactions on
Signal Processing, 45(11):2673–2681, 1997.
[24] A. Shrikumar, P. Greenside, A. Shcherbina, and A. Kundaje. Not just a black box: Learning
important features through propagating activation differences. CoRR, abs/1605.01713, 2016.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1605.01713.
[25] P. Spirtes, C. N. Glymour, and R. Scheines. Causation, Prediction, and Search. MIT Press, 2nd
edition, 2001. ISBN 9780262194402.
12

=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
[26] J. Springenberg, A. Dosovitskiy, T. Brox, and M. Riedmiller. Striving for simplicity: The all
convolutional net. CoRR, 12 2014.
[27] M. Sundararajan, A. Taly, and Q. Yan. Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In D. Precup
and Y . W. Teh, editors,Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning,
volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 3319–3328, International
Convention Centre, Sydney, Australia, 06–11 Aug 2017. PMLR. URL http://proceedings.
mlr.press/v70/sundararajan17a.html.
[28] I. Tenney, D. Das, and E. Pavlick. BERT rediscovers the classical NLP pipeline. InProceedings
of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 4593–
4601, Florence, Italy, July 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
P19-1452. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P19-1452.
[29] J. van Benthem. A brief history of natural logic. In M. Chakraborty, B. Löwe, M. Nath Mitra,
and S. Sarukki, editors, Logic, Navya-Nyaya and Applications: Homage to Bimal Matilal, 2008.
[30] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, L. u. Kaiser, and
I. Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In I. Guyon, U. V . Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach,
R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, editors,Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 30, pages 5998–6008. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. URL http://papers.nips.cc/
paper/7181-attention-is-all-you-need.pdf .
[31] T. Wolf, L. Debut, V . Sanh, J. Chaumond, C. Delangue, A. Moi, P. Cistac, T. Rault, R. Louf,
M. Funtowicz, and J. Brew. Huggingface’s transformers: State-of-the-art natural language
processing. ArXiv, abs/1910.03771, 2019.
[32] M. D. Zeiler and R. Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In D. Fleet,
T. Pajdla, B. Schiele, and T. Tuytelaars, editors,Computer Vision – ECCV 2014, pages 818–833,
Cham, 2014. Springer International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-319-10590-1.
13