=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
Measuring non-trivial compositionality
in emergent communication
Tomasz Korbak∗
Human Interactivity and Language Lab
Faculty of Psychology
University of Warsaw, Poland
tomasz.korbak@gmail.com
Julian Zubek
Human Interactivity and Language Lab
Faculty of Psychology
University of Warsaw, Poland
j.zubek@uw.edu.pl
Joanna R ˛ aczaszek-Leonardi
Human Interactivity and Language Lab
Faculty of Psychology
University of Warsaw, Poland
raczasze@psych.uw.edu.pl
Abstract
Compositionality is an important explanatory target in emergent communication
and language evolution. The vast majority of computational models of communi-
cation account for the emergence of only a very basic form of compositionality:
trivial compositionality. A compositional protocol is trivially compositional if the
meaning of a complex signal (e.g. blue circle ) boils down to the intersection of
meanings of its constituents (e.g. the intersection of the set of blue objects and the
set of circles). A protocol is non-trivially compositional (NTC) if the meaning of a
complex signal (e.g. biggest apple ) is a more complex function of the meanings
of their constituents. In this paper, we review several metrics of compositionality
used in emergent communication and experimentally show that most of them fail
to detect NTC — i.e. they treat non-trivial compositionality as a failure of compo-
sitionality. The one exception is tree reconstruction error, a metric motivated by
formal accounts of compositionality. These results emphasise important limitations
of emergent communication research that could hamper progress on modelling the
emergence of NTC.
1 Introduction
Compositionality is an important explanatory target in emergent communication and language evolu-
tion as well as a goal in representation learning and natural language processing (Brighton, 2002; Lake
et al., 2016; Chaabouni et al., 2020). The vast majority of computational models of communication
account for the emergence of only a very basic form of compositionality: trivial (Steinert-Threlkeld,
2020) or naïve compositionality (Kharitonov and Baroni, 2020). Natural languages are non-trivially
compositional (NTC) as they include phenomena like quantiﬁers, negation, word order and context-
dependence. A communication protocol is NTC if for a certain complex signal (e.g. biggest
apple) its meaning is not just the intersection of the meanings of its constituents but some more
complex function of the constituents. Despite being a necessary milestone towards accounting for the
evolution of language, NTC has received little attention from the machine learning and evolutionary
linguistics communities. We conjecture that this state of affairs is partly due to an inability to
quantitatively measure progress toward NTC in computational settings.
∗Currently at Department of Informatics, University of Sussex, United Kingdom.
4th Workshop on Emergent Communication (Talking to Strangers: Zero-Shot Emergent Communication),
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020) .
arXiv:2010.15058v2  [cs.NE]  29 Oct 2020

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
In this study, we review seven metrics of compositionality and experimentally show that most fail
to detect NTC — i.e. they treat non-trivial compositionality as a failure of compositionality. We do
observe, however, that properly parametrised tree reconstruction error (TRE) (Andreas, 2019) — a
metric directly motivated by a formal account of compositionality (Montague, 1970) — detects NTC
to a signiﬁcant degree.
To summarise, the contributions of this paper are (i) providing a common framework for comparing
different approaches to measuring compositionality in emergent communication, (ii) experimentally
showing that most metrics used in machine learning and evolutionary linguistics fail to detect
NTC, and (iii) demonstrating how to parametrise TRE to be able to detect NTC. The anonymised
code for all experiments and reusable implementations of all metrics are publicly available from
https://github.com/tomekkorbak/measuring-non-trivial-compositionality .
2 Background
sender receivermessage
 action
(magenta,	box) "ac"
Figure 1: Most research on emergent communi-
cation assumes the setup displayed on the orange
plate: a sender observes an RGB imagex, sends a
message to the receiver and the receiver acts based
on the message. To measure compositionality, we
can simplify this setup (blue plate) and consider
only a derivation di describing a compositional
structure of a situation and a functionf mapping
each derivation to a message. A derivationdi mir-
rors RGB imagex while the representationf(di)
is identical to the message sent by the sender upon
observingx.
Most research on emergent communication has
focused on a Lewis signalling game of the fol-
lowing form: a sender sends a message to a
receiver upon observing a situation and the re-
ceiver acts based upon the message (Lewis,
1969; Skyrms, 2010). If the incentives of the
sender and the receiver are aligned, they will
agree on a communication protocol. To simplify
the problem of measuring compositionality, let
us assume that the situations observed by the
sender are governed by an underlying composi-
tional structure (known to us but hidden from the
sender) and let us focus on the communication
protocol itself, understood as a mapping from
those hidden compositional structures (hence-
forth called derivations) to messages (henceforth
called representations) as shown in Figure 1.
Derivations A derivation d ∈ D can be
thought of as a tree representing a situation.
Derivations are deﬁned recursively such that ifdi anddj are derivations, then (di,dj) is a derivation,
where (·,·) is a derivation composition function. A primitive derivationd0 is called a concept. For
instance, a blue circle corresponds to a derivation (blue, circle) built out of two concepts: blue
and circle. In an emergent communication setting, that derivation can be the structure underlying
an RGB image observed by the sender.
Representations Let us have a set of representationsθ∈ Θ. A representation can be thought
of as a description of a derivation. Representations can be composed together, e.g. θi = θj◦θk,
whereθj,θk∈ Θ and◦ is a representation composition function. A primitive representation θ0 is
called a symbol. Finally, a communication protocol is a functionf :D→ Θ mapping derivations to
representations.
In this paper, we will consider three perspectives of what kind of object a representationθ∈ Θ is:
1. From a communication perspective,Θ is the set of messages understood as strings over an alphabet
Σ, i.e. Θ = Σ∗. Then,◦ corresponds to string concatenation. For instance,f((blue, circle)) =
ab.
2. From a semantic perspective, Θ is the set of meanings associated with derivations. We will assume
meanings to be sets of objects such as circles or boxes. Then,◦ corresponds to a function over
sets (e.g. set intersection). For instance, f((blue, circle)) ={x : blue(x)∧ circle(x)}.
3. From a geometric perspective, Θ is a vector space. Then,◦ corresponds to vector addition. For
instance,f((blue, circle))∈ RN , whereN = dim Θ.
While we ultimately care about the communication perspective, deﬁning the distinction between
trivial compositionality and NTC requires the semantic perspective and measuring compositionality in
terms of TRE requires approximating the semantic perspective in terms of the geometric perspective.
2

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
Compositionality Intuitively, a communication protocol embodied byf is compositional if the
space of representations is homeomorphic to the space of derivations. More formally,f is composi-
tional if the following holds:
f((di,dj)) =f(di)◦f(dj) (1)
In other words, the composition function over representations◦ mirrors the composition function
over derivations (·,·): for each derivationd obtained by applying operator (·,·) its imagef(d) can be
obtained by applying a corresponding operator◦.
This mathematical model of compositionality, originally constructed by Montague (1970) using
universal algebra, is the dominant approach in formal semantics (see (Janssen, 2010) for a review).
In the context of emergent communication, this model was recently explicitly assumed by Andreas
(2019) and Steinert-Threlkeld (2020).
Trivial and non-trivial compositionality Let us take the semantic perspective and assume Θ to
be a set of sets of objects. Then, a communication protocol is trivially compositional (TC) if the
representation composition function◦ is set intersection. Alternatively, f is NTC if◦ is a more
complex function over sets of objects (Steinert-Threlkeld, 2020).
Most signalling games studied in machine learning and evolutionary linguistics are conﬁned to
TC communication protocols. For instance, a communication protocol deﬁned over objects with
shapes and colours would probably be TC, with the meaning of a message blue circle being the
intersection of the set of circle with the set of blue objects (Mordatch and Abbeel, 2017; Kottur et al.,
2017; Korbak et al., 2019). On the other hand, a great deal of natural language semantics is NTC. For
instance, the meaning of the phrase good cook is not the intersection of the set of cooks with the set
of good people. Rather, the adjective good is highly contextual and complements the meaning of the
noun cook differently than it complements the meaning of, for example, the noun climber.
Tree reconstruction error TRE is a metric of compositionality proposed by Andreas (2019) and
directly motivated by Montague’s account of compositionality embodied in (1). First, assume there
is a distance function over representationsδ : Θ× Θ→ R+. Then we can deﬁne acompositional
approximation ˆfφ off with parametersφ as follows:
{ ˆfφ(di) =φi fordi∈D 0,
ˆfφ((dj,dk)) = ˆfφ(dj)◦ ˆfφ(dk) for all otherd.
(2)
In other words, ˆfφ assigns eachd∈D 0 an embedding vector and composes these vectors using◦
for complex derivations.◦ can be a non-parametric vector operation, e.g. addition, or a parametric
transformation, e.g. a linear transformation. The parameters φ (embedding vectors for concepts and
possible parameters of◦) are optimised so we have
φ∗ = arg max
φ
Ed∼Dδ( ˆfφ(d),f (d)). (3)
The irreducible distanceδ( ˆfφ∗(d),f (d)) given the optimal parametersφ∗ is the TRE.
Unlike in a signalling game, while optimising ˆfφ we do have explicit access to the underlying
derivationd∈D . Therefore what TRE measures is how well a given communication protocol can be
reconstructed while respecting the compositional structure ofd. A compositional protocol satisfying
(1) will by deﬁnition respectd, and hence can be reconstructed perfectly.
3 Experiments
In our experiments, we consider a well-studied signalling game in which the sender observes objects
endowed with two discernible features: shape and colour. The corresponding derivations d∈D
are ordered tuples of two kinds of concepts: shapes and colours, e.g. (blue, circle). The set of
primitive derivationsD0 ={blue, red,... }∪{ square, triangle,... } consists of 25 colours and
25 shapes. We take the set of representations to be a set of strings of lengthL over a ﬁnite alphabet,
i.e. Θ = ΣL, where Σ ={a,b,... }.
3

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
We consider nine pre-deﬁned communication protocols suitable for solving the signalling game
deﬁned above: one TC, six NTC (entangled, diagonal, negation, rotated, context-sensitive) and two
non-compositional baselines (random and holistic). We designed these protocols as minimal models
of NTC phenomena found in natural languages and formal languages: negation (e.g. not circle ),
conversational context (e.g. requiring only shape to be communicated), word order (ab is different
from ba) and entanglement in the representation learning sense (Kharitonov and Baroni, 2020). These
probing protocols are thus aligned with linguistic intuitions (and with existing literature, whenever
possible) about what constitutes (trivial or non-trivial) compositionality. For a detailed description of
all communication protocols considered in this experiment, see appendix A.
We then consider seven metrics of compositionality used by the machine learning community and
report how they score the protocols. The metrics considered are TRE, conﬂict count, topographic sim-
ilarity, BOW disentanglement, generalisation, positional disentanglement and context independence.
For TRE, we implemented◦, the composition functions forN-dimensional vector representations
of derivations, as linear transformation — i.e. ◦ : s1◦s2↦→ As1 +Bs2, where s1,s 2∈ Θ are
vector-encoded symbols andA,B∈ RN×N are learnable parameters. We describe experiments with
other implementations of◦ in appendix C. For a detailed descriptions of used metrics, see appendix
B.
The results of the evaluation are displayed in Figure 2. We can observe that while (almost) all
protocols assign high compositionality scores to the TC protocol and low compositionality scores to
non-compositional (holistic and random) protocols, most also assign low scores to NTC protocols.
Generalisation, somewhat in line with recent results (Chaabouni et al., 2020), is low for some
NTC protocols (negation, context-sensitive, entangled, diagonal, rotated). Assuming that receiver’s
generalisation requires both productivity of a communication protocol used by the sender and capacity
of the receiver, low generalisation for NTC protocols may be explained by insufﬁcient capacity of the
receiver. This, in turn, suggests that generalising to NTC requires higher capacity and/or stronger
inductive biases than generalising to TC. Context independence, topographical similarity, positional
disentanglement, BOW disentanglement and conﬂict count can pick up only the simplest forms of
NTC such as negation and and order-sensitivity. TRE is the only metric that assigns high scores to all
NTC protocols.
Figure 2: Scores assigned by various compositionality metrics to various protocols. Each subplot
corresponds to a different metric, with protocols on the Y-axis and scores on the X-axis. Note that
the X-axes does not share a common scale and we report negative TRE and negative conﬂict count.
Thus, for each metric, a higher value means greater compositionality. Conﬂict count is undeﬁned for
negation and context-sensitive protocols. We observed negligible variance across across ﬁve random
seeds.
4

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
4 Discussion
We conjecture that the reason most metrics fail to capture NTC is because they were designed under
the assumption of TC as the canonical form of compositionality. This assumption, however, seems
to be guided by a simpliﬁed signalling game setup rather than formal accounts of compositionality
(Janssen, 2010) or corpus data. That design choice may, in turn, stem from a more general problem
of designing meaningful metrics for emergent communication (Lowe et al., 2019) and translating
theoretical accounts in linguistics into quantitative measures. To illustrate one such translation
problem, if we do not restrict the composition function◦ to be of a particular class, any language
may be considered compositional (see appendix C).
Despite these difﬁculties, NTC is ubiquitous in natural languages. Phenomena such as function words
and dependency relations (Rizzi and Cinque, 2016) demonstrate that primitive concepts cannot be
treated as completely orthogonal (Murphy, 1988) and natural languages use more than one form
of symbol composition (Gärdenfors, 1995). Our aim in this paper was to introduce NTC as an
explanatory target for emergent communication and to demonstrate how to measure it in terms of
TRE. We hope these contributions will guide future work accounting for the emergence of NTC and
closing the gap between emergent and human communication.
Broader impact
The ﬁeld of emergent communication constitutes basic research and is focused on a theoretical
problem: the emergence of language. However, the problem of learning compositional representations
and understanding compositional language has broader implications for natural language processing
and representation learning. Concrete problems that can be posed as emergent communication include
image captioning (Kottur et al., 2017)) and unsupervised machine translation (Lee et al., 2017) (both
of which can be considered visually grounded communication) as well as explainability (Andreas
et al., 2017). Research on learning compositional representations also informs the development of
natural language processing technologies such as semantic parsing and machine reasoning (Hudson
and Manning, 2018). These systems are vulnerable to bias, permit malicious use and can give rise
to unintended adverse effects. On the other hand, the conjectured interpretability and robustness
of compositional representations could improve the transparency and fairness of machine learning
systems that utilise such representations, as well as advance progress on conversational systems that
empower disadvantaged individuals.
Acknowledgments
Tomasz Korbak, Julian Zubek and Joanna R ˛ aczaszek-Leonardi were funded by a National Science
Centre (Poland) grant OPUS 2018/29/B/HS1/00884. The authors are grateful to Krzysztof Główka,
Łukasz Kuci ´nski and Paweł Kołodziej for their helpful feedback.
References
Andreas, J. (2019). Measuring Compositionality in Representation Learning. International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations. arXiv: 1902.07181.
Andreas, J., Dragan, A., and Klein, D. (2017). Translating Neuralese.
Barrett, J., Skyrms, B., and Cochran, C. (2018). Hierarchical Models for the Evolution of Com-
positional Language. Institute for Mathematical Behavioral Sciences Technical Report MBS
18-03.
Bogin, B., Geva, M., and Berant, J. (2018). Emergence of Communication in an Interactive World
with Consistent Speakers. arXiv:1809.00549 [cs]. arXiv: 1809.00549.
Brighton, H. (2002). Compositional Syntax From Cultural Transmission. Artiﬁcial Life, 8(1):25–54.
Brighton, H. and Kirby, S. (2006). Understanding Linguistic Evolution by Visualizing the Emergence
of Topographic Mappings. Artiﬁcial Life, 12(2):229–242.
5

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
Chaabouni, R., Kharitonov, E., Bouchacourt, D., Dupoux, E., and Baroni, M. (2020). Composi-
tionality and Generalization In Emergent Languages. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 4427–4442, Online. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Chen, R. T. Q., Li, X., Grosse, R., and Duvenaud, D. (2019). Isolating Sources of Disentanglement
in Variational Autoencoders. arXiv:1802.04942 [cs, stat]. arXiv: 1802.04942.
Chomsky, N. (1957). Syntactic structures. OCLC: 934673149.
Gärdenfors, P. (1995). Language and the Evolution of Cognition. ISSN: 1101-8453.
Hochreiter, S. and Schmidhuber, J. (1997). Long Short-Term Memory. Neural Computation,
9(8):1735–1780.
Hudson, D. A. and Manning, C. D. (2018).Compositional Attention Networks for Machine Reasoning.
_eprint: 1803.03067.
Janssen, T. M. V . (2010). Compositionality. InHandbook of Logic and Linguistics. Elsevier Science
Publishers.
Kharitonov, E. and Baroni, M. (2020). Emergent Language Generalization and Acquisition Speed
are not tied to Compositionality. arXiv:2004.03420 [cs]. arXiv: 2004.03420.
Kharitonov, E., Chaabouni, R., Bouchacourt, D., and Baroni, M. (2019). EGG: a toolkit for research
on Emergence of lanGuage in Games. arXiv:1907.00852 [cs]. arXiv: 1907.00852.
Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. (2014). Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. arXiv:1412.6980
[cs]. arXiv: 1412.6980.
Korbak, T., Zubek, J., Kuci´nski, L., Miło´s, P., and R ˛ aczaszek-Leonardi, J. (2019). Developmentally
motivated emergence of compositional communication via template transfer. NeurIPS 2019
workshop Emergent Communication: Towards Natural Language.
Kottur, S., Moura, J. M. F., Lee, S., and Batra, D. (2017). Natural Language Does Not Emerge
’Naturally’ in Multi-Agent Dialog. arXiv:1706.08502 [cs]. arXiv: 1706.08502.
Kriegeskorte, N. (2008). Representational similarity analysis – connecting the branches of systems
neuroscience. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience.
Kuci´nski, L., Kołodziej, P., and Miło´s, P. (2020). Emergence of compositional language in communi-
cation through noisy channel.
Lake, B. M., Ullman, T. D., Tenenbaum, J. B., and Gershman, S. J. (2016). Building Machines That
Learn and Think Like People. arXiv:1604.00289 [cs, stat]. arXiv: 1604.00289.
Lazaridou, A., Hermann, K. M., Tuyls, K., and Clark, S. (2018). Emergence of Linguistic Commu-
nication from Referential Games with Symbolic and Pixel Input. arXiv:1804.03984 [cs]. arXiv:
1804.03984.
Lee, J., Cho, K., Weston, J., and Kiela, D. (2017). Emergent Translation in Multi-Agent Communica-
tion. _eprint: 1710.06922.
Levenshtein, V . I. (1966). Binary Codes Capable of Correcting Deletions, Insertions and Reversals.
Soviet Physics Doklady, 10:707.
Lewis, D. K. (1969). Convention: a philosophical study. Blackwell, Oxford, nachdr. edition. OCLC:
837747718.
Lowe, R., Foerster, J., Boureau, Y .-L., Pineau, J., and Dauphin, Y . (2019). On the Pitfalls of Measuring
Emergent Communication. arXiv:1903.05168 [cs, stat]. arXiv: 1903.05168.
Montague, R. (1970). Universal grammar. Theoria, 36(3):373–398.
Mordatch, I. and Abbeel, P. (2017). Emergence of Grounded Compositional Language in Multi-Agent
Populations. In AAAI.
6

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
Murphy, G. L. (1988). Comprehending Complex Concepts. Cognitive Science, 12(4):529–562.
Paszke, A., Gross, S., Chintala, S., Chanan, G., Yang, E., DeVito, Z., Lin, Z., Desmaison, A., Antiga,
L., and Lerer, A. (2017). Automatic differentiation in PyTorch.
Resnick, C., Gupta, A., Foerster, J., Dai, A. M., and Cho, K. (2020). Capacity, Bandwidth, and Com-
positionality in Emergent Language Learning. arXiv:1910.11424 [cs, stat]. arXiv: 1910.11424.
Rizzi, L. and Cinque, G. (2016). Functional Categories and Syntactic Theory. Annual Review of
Linguistics, 2(1):139–163.
Skyrms, B. (2010). Signals: evolution, learning, & information. Oxford University Press, Oxford ;
New York. OCLC: ocn477256653.
Steinert-Threlkeld, S. (2020). Towards the Emergence of Non-trivial Compositionaliy. Philosophy of
Science.
7

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
A Communication protocols used in the experiments
Recall that given an observation based on derivationd∈D the sender sends a messagem composed
ofL symbols (s1,s 2,...,s L)∈ ΣL:
f(d) = (s1,s 2). (4)
Unless speciﬁed otherwise,L = 2,d = (d1,d 2), whered1,d 2∈D 0 are primitive observations for
shape and colour. Then, each message has a form (s1,s 2).
The communication protocolsf are deﬁned as follows.
Trivially compositional (TC) protocol The TC protocol was constructed by assuming a ﬁxed one-
to-one mapping between concepts and symbols, e.g. blue with a and circle with b and generating a
message for each shape–colour pair by concatenating associated symbols, e.g.f((blue, circle)) =
ab.
Holistic protocol In animal communication research, a holistic communication system is one
in which messages (e.g. (s1,s 2)) only have meaning as a whole and their parts ( s1 ands2) are
meaningless without context. Hence, we construct a holistic communication protocol by uniformly
sampling a pair of symbols (s1,s 2) (without replacement) from Σ2 for eachd∈D .
Random protocol We construct the random protocol by sampling each symbol separately, with
replacement, i.e.s1∼p(Σ),s 2∼p(Σ) for each eachd∈D .
Entangled NTC protocol We use an example provided by Kharitonov and Baroni (2020), a
compositional protocol that refers to complex properties of the objects constructed as combinations
of basic concepts.
Let us also assume that both concepts and symbols are represented by non-negative integers from
ﬁnite ﬁelds closed under modular addition and subtraction, e.g. D0 = {0, 1, 2,..., 10}, Σ =
{0, 1, 2,..., 10}. Then we have:
s1 = (d1−d2) mod 10 , (5)
s2 = (d1 +d2) mod 10 . (6)
The non-triviality off here stems from the fact that it entangles shapes and colours, so that boths1
ands2 depend on both the shape and the colour. Kharitonov and Baroni (2020) consider this protocol
to be a counter-example to naïve compositionality, which is essentially what we mean by NTC.
Rotated NTC protocol The rotated protocol is similar to the entangled protocol. It is obtained
by encoding concepts numerically, rotating the coordinate system by 45 degrees and then mapping
obtained values to symbols in the order they appear on the newly obtained axes. Under the same
assumptions as the entangled protocol above, the concept–symbol relationship is deﬁned as:
s1 =d1−d2 + 10 (7)
s2 =d1 +d2 (8)
Order-sensitive NTC protocol This protocol is constructed analogously to the TC protocol with
one difference: each symbol is used to communicate both a colour and a shape. For instance, d
means blue when on the ﬁrst position in the message andsquare when on the second position. This
protocol is NTC because it constrains◦ to be non-commutative.
Context-sensitive NTC protocol This protocol is based on the game described by Barrett et al.
(2018). We modify our setup so the derivationsd∈D are nested tuples(context, (colour, shape)).
context can be colour, shape or both. This corresponds to a signalling game when the sender is
also provided with information which concept (shape and/or colour) must be communicated to the
receiver and disincentivised from communicating too much. This protocol is NTC because message
length is a function of context.
8

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
Negation NTC protocol The negation protocol is based on the intuition that negation constitutes a
minimal instance of NTC in natural language semantics. To illustrate this, we modify our setup by
assuming that there are just two shapes, circle and box, and the agent only has a word x to refer to
the box. However, it also uses a symbol ! as a negation and can refer to circles as ‘not boxes’, i.e. !x.
The part of the message communicating the shape is then trivially composed, with the second part
communicating colour. The non-triviality of this protocol lies in the fact that the meaning of !x is a
nontrivial function of the meaning ! and x. The semantics of this protocol cannot be formulated in
terms of set intersection, because there is no set that could constitute the meaning of the negation
token !.
Diagonal NTC protocol This protocol reﬂects a language with two-word utterances, where one
word represents intensity and the second certain property or axis of variability (examples from natural
language: ‘low brightness’, ‘high contrast’, ‘medium volume’). In this example we refer to a complex
property being a combination of basic concepts.
Let us assume both concepts and symbols are represented by non-negative integers: d1 ∈
{0, 1,...,n 1}, d2 ∈{ 0, 1,...,n 2}, s1 ∈{ 0, 1,...,n 1 +n2}, s2 ∈{ 0, 1,...,n 1}. An object
embodying conceptsd1,d2 is represented with a pair of symbols (s1,s 2):
s1 =d1 +d2 (9)
s2 =
{d2 if d1 +d2≤n1
n1−d1 otherwise (10)
Concrete examples of communication protocols described above are provided in Tables 1 and 2.
B Compositionality metrics
Generalisation Compositionality is widely considered to be the feature of language and thought
that explains the generalisation capabilities of humans (Chomsky, 1957; Lake et al., 2016). While
recent research in emergent communication shows that the relationship between compositionality and
generalisation is nuanced (Chaabouni et al., 2020; Kharitonov and Baroni, 2020) and in some sig-
nalling games compositionality is not necessary for generalisation, generalisation to novel situations
remains an intuitive hallmark of compositionality.
Here we measure the test set accuracy of a receiver trained to predict the ground-truth derivationsd
based on messages send by a ﬁxed senderf(d). More concretely, we implement the receiver as a
neural networks that ﬁrst embeds each symbol of a messagef(d) into a 50 embedding vector, feeds
each of these embedding to a single-layer LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997) and then feeds
the last hidden state vector of the LSTM into a two-layer feed-forward neural network. The output of
the network is a tuple of categorical distributions over all concepts in the derivation. The loss function
consists is a sum of cross-entropy errors for for all concepts. The neural network is implemented in
PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2017) using EGG (Kharitonov et al., 2019). We train it using Adam (Kingma
and Ba, 2014) with learning rate 10−2 and batch size 1. We useL2 regularisation with coefﬁcient
λ = 10−6 and initialise the embedding vectors by sampling fromN (0, 1).
For the purpose of our experiments, we split the set of derivationsD intoDtrain (80% of the derivations)
andDtest (20% of the derivations). We train the receiver onDtrain for 100 epochs or until it achieves
training set accuracy 1. We then measure the accuracy of the receiver onDtest. The reported accuracies
are averaged across ﬁve random seeds.
Positional disentanglement Chaabouni et al. (2020) introduced positional disentanglement as an
adaptation of similar metrics developed in the representation learning community (Chen et al., 2019).
It is also related to context independence and residual entropy introduced by Resnick et al. (2020). Let
sj denote thej-th symbol of a messagef(d), andcj
1 the concept with the highest mutual information
withsj, andcj
2 with the second highest mutual information:
cj
1 = arg max
c
I(sj;c), (11)
9

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
cj
2 = arg max
c̸=cj
1
I(sj;c), (12)
whereI(·;·) is mutual information andc∈D 0. Then, positional disentanglement posdis is deﬁned
as
posdis = 1
L
L∑
j=1
I(sj;cj
1)−I (sj;cj
2)
H(sj) (13)
whereL is the maximum message length andH(sj) is entropy over the distribution of symbols at
j-th place in messagesf(d) for eachd∈D . We ignore positions with zero entropy.
Bag-of-words disentanglement Note that positional disentanglement assumes that compositional-
ity involves ﬁxed order (e.g. the meaning of symbola at ﬁrst place is different from the meaning of
symbol a at second place in the message). Bag-of-words disentanglement relaxes this assumption
by only considering symbols counts:nj is the number of occurrences inj-th symbol in a message.
Then, bag-of-words disentanglement, bosdis, is deﬁned as
bosdis = 1
|Σ|
|Σ|∑
j=1
I(nj;cj
1)−I (nj;cj
2)
H(nj) , (14)
where|Σ| is the number of symbols available in the protocol.
Tree reconstruction error We deﬁne ˆfφ to be a neural network so we can optimise its parameters
φ via gradient descent over∇φδ(f(d), ˆfφ(d)). More concretely, to generate a reconstruction ˆfφ(d) of
a derivationd, we follow (2) and ﬁrst embed each conceptd∈D 0 formingd into anN-dimensional
embedding vector, whereN =|Σ|L (withL the maximum message length, ﬁxed in advance). Then,
we encode the entire d into an N-dimensional embedding vector by recursively applying ◦ in a
bottom-up manner. The ground truth message corresponding to derivationd is encoded asL one-hot
vectors. We then deﬁneδ(f(d), ˆfφ(d)) to be a sum ofL cross-entropy errors betweeni-th segment
of the reconstruction ˆfφ(d)) andi-th one-hot-encoded symbol in the ground truth messagef(d). The
neural network was implemented in PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2017). We train it for 1000 epochs using
Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2014) with learning rate 10−1. We useL2 regularisation with coefﬁcient
λ = 10−5 and initialise the embedding vectors by sampling fromN (0, 1).
Context independence Context independence (Bogin et al., 2018) measures the alignment between
symbols forming a message and concepts forming a derivations. Let us denote the set of concepts
byD0 and the set of symbols by Σ. By p(s|c), we mean the probability that f maps a derivation
containing conceptc∈D 0 to a message containing symbols∈ Σ. We deﬁne the inverse probability
p(c|s) similarly. Finally, we deﬁne sk := arg maxsp(c|s); sc is the symbol most often sent in
presence of a conceptc. Then, context independence metric is E(p(vk|k)·p(k|vk)); the expectation
is taken with respect to the joint uniform distributionp(D0, Σ).
For instance, when the derivation consists of a shape and a colour, our experiments, context inde-
pendence measures the consistency of associating symbols with shapes irrespective of colour and
vice versa. Note that context independence effectively punishes the agents for using synonyms, i.e.
associating multiple symbols with a single concept (Lowe et al., 2019).
Topographical similarity Topographical similarity (Brighton and Kirby, 2006; Lazaridou et al.,
2018) is a measure of structural similarity between messages and derivations. Let us deﬁne LD :
D×D→ R+ to be a distance over derivations and Lm : Σ∗× Σ∗→ R+ to be a distance over
messages. Topographical similarity is the Spearman ρ correlation of Lt andLm measured over
a joint uniform distribution p(D0, Σ). Topographical similarity mirrors the approach known as
representation similarity analysis in systems neuroscience (Kriegeskorte, 2008) where it is used to
quantify structural similarity between a stimulus and neural activity evoked by the stimulus
We chooseLm to be the Levenshtein (1966) distance and treat derivations as ordered pairs of concepts
so we can chooseLD to be the Hamming distance.
10

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
Conﬂict count Conﬂict count was introduced by Kuci ´nski et al. (2020). It assumes that the number
of concepts in a derivationK is equal to message lengthL and that there is a one-to-one mapping
between each conceptd∈D 0 and symbols∈ ΣL. It then counts how often this mapping is violated.
Let us denote each permutation mapping the position of a symbol to the position of concepts asφ,
whereφ :{1,...,L }↦→{ 1,...,K }. Then, let us denote the principal meaning of a symbol s∈ ΣL
at positionj as m(s,j ) := arg maxd count(s,j,d ), where
count(s,j,d ) =
∑
d′∈D
1(f(d)j =s,d′
φ(j) =d) (15)
Here 1 denotes the indicator function anddj thej-th concept in a derivationd. Then, conﬂict count
is
min
φ
∑
s,j
score(s,j ;φ), (16)
where score(s,j ;φ) =∑
d̸=m(s,j) count(s,j,d ).
Because conﬂict count assumes the number of concepts in a derivation K to be equal to message
lengthL, it is undeﬁned for two protocols violating this assumption: negation and context sensitive.
C Effect of composition function ◦ in TRE
In this additional experiment, we analyse the effect of various implementations of◦ (the composition
function for N-dimensional vector representations of derivations d∈D ) on TRE scores across
protocols. We consider three implementations of◦:
1. Additive composition, where◦ is vector addition:
◦ :s1◦s2↦→s1 +s2. (17)
2. Linear composition, where ◦ is a linear transformation:
◦ :s1◦s2↦→As1 +Bs2, (18)
whereA,B∈ RN×N are learnable parameters.
3. Non-linear composition, where◦ is a two-layer feedforward neural network:
◦ :s1◦s2↦→W2 tanh(W11s1 +W12s2 +b1) +b2. (19)
HereW2∈ RN×H,W11,W 12∈ RH×N ,b1∈ RH,b2∈ RN andH denotes the size of the
hidden layer. We chooseH = 50.
The results of the experiments are presented in Figure 3. While additive and linear composition
perform similarly, the model capacity of non-linear composition is probably too strong for the task,
resulting in severe overﬁtting (e.g. low TRE even for random and holisitc protocols) and a false
negative for the context-sensitive protocol. The presented results were stable across hyperparameters
of TRE (e.g. learning rate, weight decay coefﬁcient, number of epochs).
11

=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
Figure 3: Scores assigned by various compositionality metrics to various protocols. Each subplot
corresponds to a different metric, with protocols on the Y-axis and scores on the X-axis. Again, the
X-axes do not share a common scale and we report negative TRE so a higher value means greater
compositionality. The width of the box for each score is its conﬁdence interval describing the standard
deviation across ﬁve random seeds.
derivation holistic TC random entangled order sensitive diagonal rotated
(blue, square) ia hf fj ii dd dd di
(blue, circle) hj hi eg jd da jj ef
(blue, ellipse) ea hd gd af dc hh ch
(blue, triangle) bd ha ic eg de bb hc
(blue, rectangle) fc hc if cb db aa fe
(green, square) gc jf bh dd cd jd bf
(green, circle) hg ji hf if ca hj dh
(green, ellipse) ga jd bf jg cc bh ec
(green, triangle) gi ja hi ab ce ab ce
(green, rectangle) ba jc dh eh cb gb hd
(gold, square) fa ef fb ff ed hd jh
(gold, circle) ef ei ff dg ea bj bc
(gold, ellipse) gf ed aj ib ec ah de
(gold, triangle) fg ea ae jh ee gh ed
(gold, rectangle) jf ec ji ac eb ch cb
(yellow, square) gg gf fh gg ad bd ac
(yellow, circle) ha gi aa fb aa aj je
(yellow, ellipse) fb gd ib dh ac gj bd
(yellow, triangle) ig ga ia ic ae cj db
(yellow, rectangle) ii gc gg je ab ij ej
(red, square) db bf bc bb bd ad ge
(red, circle) bf bi jd gh ba gd ad
(red, ellipse) hh bd ch fc bc cd jb
(red, triangle) ce ba fa de be id bj
(red, rectangle) jc bc fb ia bb ed da
Table 1: Examples of holistic, TC, random, entangled, order sensitive, diagonal and rotated protocols
for derivations with ﬁve colours and ﬁve shapes.
12

=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
derivation message
(colour, (blue, square)) e
(shape, (blue, square)) c
(both, (blue, square)) ec
(colour, (blue, circle)) e
(shape, (blue, circle)) h
(both, (blue, circle)) eh
(colour, (blue, ellipse)) e
(shape, (blue, ellipse)) a
(both, (blue, ellipse)) ea
(colour, (blue, triangle)) e
(shape, (blue, triangle)) g
(both, (blue, triangle)) eg
(colour, (blue, rectangle)) e
(shape, (blue, rectangle)) i
(both, (blue, rectangle)) ei
(colour, (green, square)) d
(a) Context-sensititive protocol
derivation message
(blue, circle) a!x
(blue, box) ax
(red, circle) b!x
(red, box) bx
(green, circle) c!x
(green, box) cx
(yellow, circle) d!x
(yellow, box) dx
(gold, circle) e!x
(gold, box) ex
(orange, circle) f!x
(orange, box) fx
(white, circle) g!x
(white, box) gx
(black, circle) h!x
(black, box) hx
(pink, circle) i!x
(pink, box) ix
(silver, circle) j!x
(silver, box) jx
(bronze, circle) k!x
(bronze, box) kx
(b) Negation protocol
Table 2: Examples of context-sensitive and negation protocols
13