=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
Proceedings of the Third BlackboxNLP Workshop on Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP , pages 11–15
Online, November 20, 2020. c⃝2020 Association for Computational Linguistics
11
Emergent Language Generalization and Acquisition Speed are not tied to
Compositionality
Eugene Kharitonov
Facebook AI
kharitinov@fb.com
Marco Baroni
Facebook AI, ICREA
mbaroni@fb.com
Abstract
Studies of discrete languages emerging when
neural agents communicate to solve a joint
task often look for evidence of compositional
structure. This stems for the expectation that
such a structure would allow languages to be
acquired faster by the agents and enable them
to generalize better. We argue that these ben-
eﬁcial properties are only loosely connected
to compositionality. In two experiments, we
demonstrate that, depending on the task, non-
compositional languages might show equal, or
better, generalization performance and acqui-
sition speed than compositional ones. Further
research in the area should be clearer about
what beneﬁts are expected from composition-
ality, and how the latter would lead to them.
1 Introduction
There is a recent spike of interest in studying the
languages that emerge when artiﬁcial neural agents
communicate to solve a common task (Foerster
et al., 2016; Lazaridou et al., 2016; Havrylov and
Titov, 2017). A good portion of such studies looks
for traces of compositional structure in those lan-
guages, or even tries to inject such structure into
them (Kottur et al., 2017; Choi et al., 2018; Lazari-
dou et al., 2018; Mordatch and Abbeel, 2018; An-
dreas, 2019; Cogswell et al., 2019; Li and Bowling,
2019; Resnick et al., 2019; Chaabouni et al., 2020).
Besides possibly providing insights on how compo-
sitionality emerged in natural language (Townsend
et al., 2018), this emphasis is justiﬁed by the idea
that a compositional language has various desir-
able properties. In particular, compositional lan-
guages are expected to help agents to better gen-
eralize to new (composite) inputs (Kottur et al.,
2017; Lazaridou et al., 2018), and to be faster to
acquire (Cogswell et al., 2019; Li and Bowling,
2019; Ren et al., 2019).
We engage here with this ongoing research pur-
suit. We step back and reﬂect on the beneﬁts that
compositionality can bring to the emergent lan-
guages: if there is none, then it is unlikely that
agents will develop compositional languages on
their own. Indeed, several studies have shown that
compositionality does not emerge naturally among
neural agents (e.g. Kottur et al., 2017; Lazaridou
et al., 2018; Andreas, 2019). On the other hand, un-
derstanding what beneﬁts compositionality could
bring to a language would help us in establishing
the conditions for its emergence.
Compositionality is typically seen as a property
of a language, independent of the task being consid-
ered. However, the task will likely inﬂuence proper-
ties such as generalization and ease of acquisition,
that compositionality is expected to correlate with.
Our experiments show that it is easy to construct
tasks for which a compositional language is equally
hard, or harder, to acquire and does not generalize
better than a non-compositional one. Hence, lan-
guage emergence researchers need to be clear about
i) which beneﬁts they expect from compositional-
ity and ii) in which way compositionality would
lead to those beneﬁts in their setups. Otherwise,
the agents will likely develop perfectly adequate
communication systems that are not compositional.
2 Operationalizing compositionality
Before we proceed, let us clarify our deﬁnition
of compositionality. Linguists and philosophers
have extensively studied the topic for centuries
(see Pagin and Westerst ˚ahl, 2010a,b, for a thor-
ough review). However, the standard deﬁnition
that a language is compositional if the meaning of
each expression in it is a function of the meaning
of its parts and the rules to combine them is so
general as to be vacuous for our purposes (under
such deﬁnition, even the highly opaque languages

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
12
we will introduce below are compositional, contra
our intuitions).
In most current language emergence research,
the input to language is composite in the sense that
it consists of ensembles of elements. In this con-
text, intuitively, a language is compositional if its
symbols denote input elements in a disentangled
way, so that they can be freely juxtaposed to refer
to arbitrary combinations of them. More precisely,
the following property might sufﬁce for a limited
but practical characterization of compositionality.
Given a set of atomic input elements (for exam-
ple, a set of independent attribute values), each
atomic symbol should refer to one and only one in-
put element, independently of the other symbols it
co-occurs with.1 A language where all symbols re-
spect this property is compositional in the intuitive
sense that, if we know the symbols that denote a set
of input elements, we can assemble them (possibly,
following some syntactic rules of the language) to
refer to the ensemble of those input elements, ir-
respective of whether we have ever observed the
relevant ensemble. Consider for example a world
where inputs consist of two attributes, each taking
a number of values. A language licensing only two-
character sequences, where the character in the ﬁrst
position refers to the value of the ﬁrst attribute, and
that in the second position independently refers to
the value of the second, would be compositional
in our sense. On the other hand, a language that
also licenses two-character sequences, but where
both characters in a sequence are needed to decode
the values of both the ﬁrst and the second input at-
tribute, would not be compositional. We will refer
to the lack of symbol interdependence in denoting
distinct input elements as na¨ıve compositionality.2
We believe that na¨ıve compositionality captures
the intuition behind explicit and implicit deﬁni-
tions of compositionality in emergent language re-
search. For example, Kottur et al. (2017) deem
non-compositional those languages that either use
single symbols to refer to ensembles of input ele-
ments, or where the meaning of a symbol depends
on the context in which it occurs. Havrylov and
Titov (2017) looked for symbol-position combina-
1We leave the deﬁnition of what counts as an atomic sym-
bol open: it could be a single character, a character bound to a
certain position in a message string, a character sequence, etc.
2Na¨ıve in the sense that it is only appropriate when com-
plex meanings are ensembles of atomic meanings. The deﬁni-
tion breaks down when complex meanings result from func-
tions that merge their components in different ways than sim-
ple ensembling, as is often the case in natural language.
tions that encode a single concept in an image, as a
sign of a compositional behavior. A na¨ıvely com-
positional language will maximize the two recently
proposed compositionality measures of residual
entropy (Resnick et al., 2019) and positional disen-
tanglement (Chaabouni et al., 2020).
Na¨ıve compositionality is also closely related
to the notion of disentanglement in representation
learning (Bengio et al., 2013). Interestingly, Lo-
catello et al. (2018) reported that disentanglement
is not necessarily helpful for sample efﬁciency in
downstream tasks, as had been previously argued.
This resonates with our results below.
3 Communication Game
We base our experimental study on a one-episode
one-direction communication game, as commonly
done in the relevant literature (Lazaridou et al.,
2016, 2018; Havrylov and Titov, 2017; Chaabouni
et al., 2019). In this setup, we have two agents,
Sender and Receiver. An input i is fed into Sender,
in turn Sender produces a messagem, which is con-
sumed by Receiver. Receiver produces its output ˆo.
Comparing the output ˆo with the ground-truth out-
put o provides a loss. We used EGG (Kharitonov
et al., 2019) to implement the experiments.3
In contrast to the language emergence scenario,
we use a hard-coded Sender agent that produces
a ﬁxed, pre-deﬁned language. This allows us to
easily control the (na¨ıve) compositionality of the
language and measure how it affects Receiver’s
performance. This setup is akin to the motivating
example of Li and Bowling (2019).
We study two Receiver’s characteristics: (i) ac-
quisition speed, measured as the number of epoch
needed to achieve a ﬁxed level of performance on
training set, and (ii) generalization performance on
held-out data.
4 Experimental setup
To demonstrate that compositionality of a language
alone, detached from the task at hand, does not
necessarily lead to higher generalization or faster
acquisition speed, we design two experiments.
The ﬁrst experiment ( attval) operates in an
attribute-value world, similar to those of Kottur
et al. (2017); Chaabouni et al. (2019). We ﬁx
two languages, one compositional and one not,
3The code is available at https://github.com/
facebookresearch/EGG/tree/master/egg/
zoo/compositional_efficiency.

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
13
Acquisition speed
task-identity task-linear task-entangled
LSTM
lang-identity 5.3±0.1 30.0±1.4 20.1±0.6
lang-entangled 20.1±0.5 26.6±0.8 5.5±0.2
GRU
lang-identity 5.6±0.2 94.0±7.7 57.4±13.9
lang-entangled 37.2±2.7 91.5±4.7 5.7±0.2
Test accuracy
task-identity task-linear task-entangled
LSTM
lang-identity 0.97±0.00 0.0±0.0 0.06±0.01
lang-entangled 0.08±0.01 0.0±0.0 0.97±0.00
GRU
lang-identity 0.97±0.00 0.0±0.0 0.06±0.01
lang-entangled 0.10±0.02 0.0±0.0 0.97±0.00
Table 1: Attval experiment. Top: epochs to achieve per-
fect accuracy on training set. Bottom: test accuracy af-
ter convergence. ± marks 1 standard error of the mean.
and build three tasks: (i) “easy” for compositional
language and “hard” for non-compositional; (ii)
equally “hard” for both; (iii) “hard” for composi-
tional language and “easy” for non-compositional
language. Informally, we control the amount of
computation needed by Receiver to perform a task
starting from a language, where it can be equally
hard to rely on compositional or non-compositional
languages, or the answers could even be readily
available in a non-compositional language.
In the second experiment (coordinates), we de-
sign a single task that is equally “easy” for an en-
tire family of languages (parameterized by a con-
tinuous value), including compositional and non-
compositional ones. The task is to transmit points
on the 2D plane (thus, the input ensembles here
are pairs of point coordinates). Here, we leverage
the observation that a typical neural model has a
linear output layer, for which it is equally easy to
learn any rotation of the ground-truth outputs. Such
rotation-group-invariance could play role in games
where continuous image embeddings are used as
input (Lazaridou et al., 2016; Havrylov and Titov,
2017).
4.1 Attval experiment
Input Sender’s input i is a two-dimensional vec-
tor; each dimension encodes one of two attributes,
each havingnv values: i ∈ {1..nv} × {1..nv}.
Languages We consider two languages, with
messages of length two and vocabulary size nv.
The ﬁrst language,lang-identity, represents the in-
puts as-is, by putting the value of the ﬁrst (second)
attribute in the ﬁrst (second) position:(m1,m 2) ←
(i1,i 2). In the second language, lang-entangled,
the ﬁrst and the second positions are obtained as
follows:
mj ← (i1 + (−1)j ·i2) mod nv, j ∈ {1, 2}
(1)
Lang-identity and lang-entangled have exactly
the same n2
v utterances. While lang-identity is
na¨ıvely compositional (one symbol encodes one
attribute only), lang-entangled is not: each symbol
of an utterance encodes equal amount of informa-
tion about both attributes and both symbols are
equally needed for decoding each attribute.4
Tasks We consider three tasks. In all of them, Re-
ceiver outputs two discrete values, o ∈ {1..nv} ×
{1..nv}. In task-identity, Receiver has to recover
the original input of Sender, i. In the second task,
task-linear, Receiver needs to output two values
that are obtained as integer linear-modulo opera-
tions of the original input values: o ← A · i + b
mod nv. In the third task, task-entangled, we re-
quire Receiver to output oj ← (i1 + (−1)j ·i2)
mod nv. In this task, the output values derive
from the same attribute transform applied in the
lang-entangled language (Eq. 1). This language-
task pair mirrors thelang-identity/task-identity pair:
each symbol encodes one output value.
Architecture and hyperparameters Receiver
is implemented as an LSTM (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber, 1997) or a GRU cell (Cho et al.,
2014). Its output layer speciﬁes two categorical
distributions overnv values, encoding two output
values. As a loss, we use the sum of per-output
negative log-likelihoods. We used the following
hyperparameters:nv = 31; hidden layer size 100;
embedding size 50; batch size 32; 500 epochs train-
ing with Adam (learning rate 10−2). Each conﬁg-
uration was run 20 times with different random
seeds. A random 1/5 of the data is used as test set.
4.2 Coordinates experiment
Input We sample points uniformly from the unit
circle, centered at the origin: i ∈ R2, iT i ≤ 1.
We sample 103 points for training, 103 for testing.
4Note that lang-entangled is still (non-na¨ıvely) composi-
tional, in the sense that its messages can be predictably derived
by applying Eq. 1 to the input pairs.

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
14
8
6
4
2
train, log MSE
lang-coordinate
lang-rotated
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14
# epochs
8
6
4
test, log MSE
Figure 1: Coordinates experiment: log MSE vs. train-
ing epoch.
Languages We consider two languages with ut-
terances of length two. In the ﬁrst language,lang-
coordinate, Sender sequentially transmits both co-
ordinates of a point: mj ← ij. More precisely,
the symbols refer to discretized coordinates from
anv ×nv square grid, covering [−1, 1] × [−1, 1].
This language is na ¨ıvely compositional w.r.t. the
coordinate-wise representation of the inputs.
We construct the second language, lang-rotated,
in the following way. We start with lang-
coordinate, but apply a rotation of the plane by
π/4 before feeding a point into Sender. 5 Effec-
tively, this makes Sender “use” a rotated coordi-
nate grid for encoding the coordinates. As a result
of the rotation, lang-rotated ceases to be na¨ıvely
compositional in the original (non-rotated) world.
Each symbol of lang-rotated carries equal amounts
of information about both coordinates of i.
Task Receiver has to recover the original (non-
rotated) coordinates i of a point.
Architecture and loss Receiver is an LSTM
with hidden size 100 and embedding size 50;nv is
100; batch size is 32; we use Adam with learning
rate 10−3. As a loss, we use MSE. We run each
conﬁguration with 10 random seeds.
5 Results
Attval experiment In Table 1 we provide the
results of the attrval experiment, depending on lan-
guage, task, and Receiver architecture. We report
the number of epochs to achieve perfect accuracy
on training set (top) and the accuracy on the hold-
out set after training (bottom).
5Rotating by any angle (0,π/ 2) makes the language non-
compositional;π/4 maximally entangles it.
Consider the convergence speed ﬁrst. For both
Receiver architectures lang-identity converges con-
siderably faster than lang-entangled. This agrees
with the ﬁndings of Li and Bowling (2019). How-
ever, in task-linear both languages demonstrate
roughly the same convergence speed (the difference
is not stat. sig.). In task-entangled, lang-entangled
becomes more efﬁcient to acquire than the na¨ıvely
compositional lang-identity. Interestingly, the ac-
quisition times of task-identity/lang-identity and
task-entangled/lang-entangled are symmetrical.
Next, consider the test accuracy of the same runs
as above, measuring generalization to new attval
combinations. We observe the same patterns: task-
linear is equally hard to generalize from both lan-
guages; lang-identity reaches high test accuracy in
task-identity, while lang-entangled leads to equally
high accuracy on task-entangled. In contrast, lang-
identity performs very poorly on task-entangled,
just as lang-entangled does on task-identity.
Coordinates experiment Figure 1 reports learn-
ing curves for train and test sets (cueing acquisi-
tion speed and generalization, respectively). There
is little difference between the compositional and
non-compositional languages, in either training or
held-out loss trajectories. Note also that, evidently,
the linear mapping required here to undo the non-
na¨ıvely compositional transformation is easier for
the networks than the non-linear operation we ap-
plied in the Attval experiment, pointing to the im-
portance of taking the intrinsic biases of neural
networks into account when designing language
emergence experiments.
6 Discussion and Conclusion
Our toy experiments with hand-coded languages
make the possibly obvious but currently overlooked
point that, in isolation from the target task, there
is nothing special about a language being (na¨ıvely)
compositional. A non-compositional language can
be equally or faster to acquire than a compositional
one, and it can provide the same or better gener-
alization capabilities. Thus, if our goal is to let
compositional languages emerge, we should be
very clear about which characteristics of our setup
should lead to its emergence.
Our concern is illustrated by the recent ﬁndings
of Chaabouni et al. (2020), who observed that the
degree of compositionality of emergent languages
is not correlated with the generalization capabili-
ties of the agents that rely on them to solve a task.

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
15
Indeed, lacking any speciﬁc pressure towards de-
veloping a (na¨ıvely) compositional language, their
agents were perfectly capable of developing gen-
eralizable but non-compositional communication
systems. Our experiments provide a plausible ex-
planation of their ﬁndings.
A stronger conclusion is that perhaps we should
altogether forget about compositionality as an end
goal. The current emphasis on it might just be a
misguided effect of our human-centric bias. We
should instead directly concentrate on the proper-
ties we want agent languages to have, such as fast
learning, transmission and generalization.
References
Jacob Andreas. 2019. Measuring compositional-
ity in representation learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1902.07181.
Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Pascal Vincent.
2013. Representation learning: A review and new
perspectives. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analy-
sis and Machine Intelligence, 35(8).
Rahma Chaabouni, Eugene Kharitonov, Diane Boucha-
court, Emmanuel Dupoux, and Marco Baroni. 2020.
Compositionality and generalization in emergent
languages. In Proceedings of ACL.
Rahma Chaabouni, Eugene Kharitonov, Emmanuel
Dupoux, and Marco Baroni. 2019. Anti-efﬁcient en-
coding in emergent communication. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages
6290–6300.
Kyunghyun Cho, Bart Van Merri ¨enboer, Caglar Gul-
cehre, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Fethi Bougares, Holger
Schwenk, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Learning
phrase representations using rnn encoder-decoder
for statistical machine translation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1406.1078.
Edward Choi, Angeliki Lazaridou, and Nando de Fre-
itas. 2018. Compositional obverter communication
learning from raw visual input. In ICLP.
Michael Cogswell, Jiasen Lu, Stefan Lee, Devi Parikh,
and Dhruv Batra. 2019. Emergence of composi-
tional language with deep generational transmission.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09067.
Jakob Foerster, Ioannis Alexandros Assael, Nando
de Freitas, and Shimon Whiteson. 2016. Learning to
communicate with deep multi-agent reinforcement
learning. In NIPS, Barcelona, Spain.
Serhii Havrylov and Ivan Titov. 2017. Emergence of
language with multi-agent games: Learning to com-
municate with sequences of symbols. In NeurIPS.
Sepp Hochreiter and J ¨urgen Schmidhuber. 1997.
Long short-term memory. Neural computation ,
9(8):1735–1780.
Eugene Kharitonov, Rahma Chaabouni, Diane Boucha-
court, and Marco Baroni. 2019. EGG: a toolkit for
research on emergence of lanGuage in games. In
EMNLP.
Satwik Kottur, Jos´e Moura, Stefan Lee, and Dhruv Ba-
tra. 2017. Natural language does not emerge ‘nat-
urally’ in multi-agent dialog. In Proceedings of
EMNLP, pages 2962–2967, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Angeliki Lazaridou, Karl Moritz Hermann, Karl Tuyls,
and Stephen Clark. 2018. Emergence of linguis-
tic communication from referential games with sym-
bolic and pixel input. In ICLR.
Angeliki Lazaridou, Alexander Peysakhovich, and
Marco Baroni. 2016. Multi-agent cooperation and
the emergence of (natural) language. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1612.07182.
Fushan Li and Michael Bowling. 2019. Ease-of-
teaching and language structure from emergent com-
munication. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.02403.
Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Mario Lucic, Gun-
nar R ¨atsch, Sylvain Gelly, Bernhard Sch ¨olkopf,
and Olivier Bachem. 2018. Challenging com-
mon assumptions in the unsupervised learning
of disentangled representations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1811.12359.
Igor Mordatch and Pieter Abbeel. 2018. Emergence
of grounded compositional language in multi-agent
populations. In AAAI.
Peter Pagin and Dag Westerst˚ahl. 2010a. Composition-
ality I: Deﬁnitions and variants. Philosophy Com-
pass, 5(3):250–264.
Peter Pagin and Dag Westerst˚ahl. 2010b. Composition-
ality II: Arguments and problems. Philosophy Com-
pass, 5(3):265–282.
Yi Ren, Shangmin Guo, Serhii Havrylov, Shay Cohen,
and Simon Kirby. 2019. Enhance the composition-
ality of emergent language by iterated learning. In
Proceedings of the NeurIPS Emergent Communica-
tion Workshop.
Cinjon Resnick, Abhinav Gupta, Jakob Foerster, An-
drew M Dai, and Kyunghyun Cho. 2019. Capacity,
bandwidth, and compositionality in emergent lan-
guage learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.11424.
Simon Townsend, Sabrina Engesser, Sabine Stoll,
Klaus Zuberb ¨uhler, and Balthasar Bickel. 2018.
Compositionality in animals and humans. PLOS Bi-
ology, 16(8):1–7.