=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
Emergent Communication with Attention
Ryokan Ri (ryou0634@email.com)
Ryo Ueda (ryoryoueda@is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Jason Naradowsky (jason.narad@gmail.com)
The University of Tokyo, Japan
Abstract
To develop computational agents that better communicate us-
ing their own emergent language, we endow the agents with
an ability to focus their attention on particular concepts in the
environment. Humans often understand an object or scene as a
composite of concepts and those concepts are further mapped
onto words. We implement this intuition as cross-modal atten-
tion mechanisms in Speaker and Listener agents in a referen-
tial game and show attention leads to more compositional and
interpretable emergent language. We also demonstrate how at-
tention aids in understanding the learned communication pro-
tocol by investigating the attention weights associated with
each message symbol and the alignment of attention weights
between Speaker and Listener agents. Overall, our results sug-
gest that attention is a promising mechanism for developing
more human-like emergent language.
Keywords: emergent communication; attention; language
compositionality
Introduction
Language is a deﬁning characteristic of human beings, al-
lowing us to efﬁciently convey a wide range of ideas. One
key aspect of language is compositionality, the ability to rep-
resent complex concepts through the combination of atomic
units such as morphemes or words. To understand the de-
velopment of compositionality in human language, a ﬁeld of
research called emergent communication (Lazaridou & Ba-
roni, 2020) studies the communication protocols developed
by computational agents. These agents are often constructed
using artiﬁcial neural networks and optimized to solve a task
requiring inter-agent communication. During the optimiza-
tion process, their “language” emerges.
Previous research has identiﬁed factors to potentially en-
hance the compositionality of emergent language, such as
inter-generational learning (Li & Bowling, 2019; Ren et
al., 2020) or introducing noise to the communication chan-
nel (Łukasz Kuci ´nski et al., 2021). However, agent model
architectures have typically had minimal assumptions about
inductive bias, with speaker agents encoding information into
a single vector to initialize a RNN decoder and generate sym-
bols (Lazaridou, Peysakhovich, & Baroni, 2017; Mordatch &
Abbeel, 2018; Ren et al., 2020). While some studies have ex-
plored architectural variations (Słowik et al., 2020; Evtimova
et al., 2018), there is still much to be learned about the effects
of different architectures on inductive bias, particularly those
that reﬂect human cognitive processes.
In this study, we explore the attention mechanism . The
conceptual core of attention is the ability to adaptively focus
on relevant information, and attention has been shown to play
an important role in human cognition (Rensink, 2000), lan-
guage development (de Diego-Balaguer, Martinez-Alvarez,
& Pons, 2016), and intentional communication (Brinck,
2000). Introducing the notion of attention into emergent com-
munication can enhance its resemblance to human communi-
cation and expand the scope of the research ﬁeld. In this pa-
per, we hypothesize that attention can help agents learn clear
associations between subparts of input stimuli and language
symbols, resulting in more compositional language.
Another reason to explore the attention mechanism is its
interpretability. Emergent language is usually optimized to
maximize task rewards and the learned communication pro-
tocol often results in counter-intuitive and opaque encod-
ing (Bouchacourt & Baroni, 2018). Several metrics have been
proposed to measure speciﬁc characteristics of emergent lan-
guage (Brighton & Kirby, 2006; Lowe, Foerster, Boureau,
Pineau, & Dauphin, 2019) but these metrics provide rather
a holistic view of emergent language and do not tell us a
ﬁne-grained view of what each symbol is meant for or un-
derstood as. Attention weights, on the other hand, have been
shown to provide insights into the basis of the network’s pre-
diction (Bahdanau et al., 2015; Xu et al., 2015; Yang et al.,
2016). Incorporating attention in the process of symbol pro-
duction/comprehension will allow us to inspect the meaning
of each symbol in the messages.
In this paper, we test attention agents with the visual ref-
erential game (Lewis, 1969; Lazaridou et al., 2017), which
involves two agents: Speaker and Listener. The goal of
the game is to convey the types of items in an image that
Speaker sees to Listener. To offer extensive empirical re-
sults, we experiment with two types of popular network ar-
chitectures, LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) and
Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017), to implement the agents.
We compare the attention agents against their non-attention
counterparts to show that adding attention mechanisms to ei-
ther/both Speaker or/and Listener helps develop a more com-
positional language. We also examine the attention weights
and investigate how they shed light on the learned language.
arXiv:2305.10920v1  [cs.CL]  18 May 2023

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
Figure 1: Illustration of the attention agents in the referential game.
Experimental Framework
Referential Game
We study emergent language in the referential game (Lewis,
1969; Lazaridou et al., 2017). The game focuses on a basic
feature of language, referring to things. The version of the
referential game used in this paper is structured as follows:
1. Speaker is presented with a target object otgt∈ O and gen-
erates a message m that consists of a sequence of symbols.
2. Listener receives the message m and a candidate set C =
{o1,o2, ...,o|C|} including the target object otgt and distrac-
tor objects sampled randomly without replacement fromO.
3. Listener chooses one object from the candidate set and if it
is the target object, the game is considered successful.
The objects can be represented as a set of attributes. The
focus here is whether agents can represent the objects in a
compositional message based on the attributes.
Agent Architectures
Our goal in this paper is to test the effect of the attention
mechanism on emergent language. The attention mechanism
in machine learning takes a query vector xxx and key-value
vectors{yyy1, ...,yyyL} as input. The key-value vectors are op-
tionally transformed into separate keys and values. Attention
scores{s1, ...,sL} are calculated as the similarity between the
query and keys to produce the attention weights via the soft-
max function. Finally, the attention weights are used to pro-
duce a weighted sum of the value vectors.
A key feature of attention is that it allows the agents to se-
lectively attend to a part of multi-vector inputs. Our hypoth-
esis is that by modeling direct associations between symbols
as queries and multi-vector inputs as key-value, agents will
tend to assign symbols to meaningful subparts of the inputs
instead of opaque and non-compositional information. To test
this hypothesis, we design non-attention and attention agents
for both Speaker and Listener (Figure 1).
Object Encoder The objects are presented to the agents in
the form of a set of real-valued vectors, in our case, patch-
wise pretrained CNN feature vectors, as{ooo1, ...,oooA}.
Speaker and Listener agents have their individual ob-
ject encoders. The input vectors are independently linear-
transformed into the size of the agent’s hidden size and then
successively go through the gelu activation (Hendrycks &
Gimpel, 2016), which is commonly adapted in Transformer-
based neural networks. The non-attention agents average the
transformed vectors into a single vector ˆooo for the subsequent
computations, whereas the attention agents leave the vectors
intact and will attend to the set of vectors{ˆooo1, ..., ˆoooA}.
Speaker Agents Speaker has a message decoder that takes
the encoded vector(s) of the target object as input and gener-
ates a multi-symbol message m = (m1, ...,mT ). To provide
extensive empirical evidence on the effect of the attention
mechanism, we experiment with two common decoder archi-
tectures: the LSTM decoder from Luong, Pham, and Man-
ning (2015) and the Transformer decoder from Vaswani et
al. (2017).
At each time stept, the decoders embed a previously gener-
ated symbol into a vector mmmt−1 and produce an output hidden
vector through three steps: (1) contextualization; (2) atten-
tion; (3) post-processing. As the decoders basically follow
the original architecture, we only brieﬂy describe each step
in the LSTM and Transformer decoder with emphasis on how
attention is incorporated. The contextualization step updates
the input vector with the information of previous inputs. The
LSTM decoder uses a LSTM cell (Hochreiter & Schmidhu-
ber, 1997) and the Transformer decoder uses the self-attention
mechanism (Vaswani et al., 2017).
Then, with the contextualized input vector as the query xxxt
and the object vectors as the key-value vectors {ˆooo1, ..., ˆoooA},
the decoders perform attention. The LSTM decoder uses the
bilinear attention, where the attention score si is computed
as si
t = xxx⊤
t WWW b ˆoooi, where WWW b is a learnable matrix. The at-
tention vector is calculated as the weighted sum of the origi-
nal key-value vectors. The Transformer attention ﬁrst linear-
transforms the input vector as qqqt = WWW qxxxt ,kkki = WWW k ˆoooi,vvvi =
WWW v ˆoooi, where WWW q,WWW k,WWW v are learnable matrices. Then the
attention score is calculated using the scaled dot attention:
si
t = (qqq⊤
t kkki)/
√
d, where d is the dimension of the query and
key vectors. Finally, the attention vector is calculated as the
weighted sum of the value vectors vvvi. The original Trans-
former also has the multi-head attention mechanism, but in
the main experiments, we set the number of the attention
heads to one for interpretability and ease of analysis.
In the post-processing step, the original query vectorxxxt and
attended vector ˆxxxt combine to generate the hidden vector to

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
predict the next symbol. This integration often includes vec-
tor concatenation, addition, and transformation, as detailed in
the original papers (Luong et al., 2015; Vaswani et al., 2017).
Non-attention (NoAT) Speaker is a baseline agent that en-
codes the target object as a single vectorˆoootgt . In the decoder’s
source-target attention, this vector is always attended to, and
the focus remains ﬁxed throughout message generation.
Attention (AT) Speaker, in contrast, encodes the target ob-
ject into a set of vectors {ˆooo1
tgt , ..., ˆoooA
tgt} and the source-target
attention dynamically changes its focus at each time step.
Our agent design aims to provide a fair comparison be-
tween non-attention and attention agents, by ensuring they
possess the same modules and number of parameters. The
only distinction is the latter’s ability to adjust its focus dy-
namically when generating each symbol.
Listener Agents Listener tries to predict the target object
from a set of candidate objectsC ={o1,o2, ...,o|C|} given the
speaker message m by computing message-object matching
scores{s1, ...,s|C|} and choosing the object with the maxi-
mum score. Listener ﬁrst encodes the objects using the ob-
ject encoder and also encodes each symbol in the message
into vectors{mmm1, ...,mmmT} using a message encoder, for which
the LSTM-based agent uses the bidirectional LSTM and the
Transformer-based agent uses the Transformer encoder.
Non-attention (NoAT) Listener encodes each candidate ob-
ject into a single vector ˆoooi. The agent also averages the en-
coded symbol vectors into a single vectormmm = 1
T ∑T
i=1 mmmi. The
message-object matching score is computed by taking the dot
product of the object and message vector si = ˆooo⊤
i mmm.
Attention (AT) Listenerencodes each object into a set of at-
tribute vectors{ˆooo1
i , ..., ˆoooA
i} and use the encoded symbol vec-
tors as it is. With each encoded symbol vector mmmt as query,
the model produces an attention vector ˆmmmt
i with the object at-
tribute vectors as key-value using the dot-product attention.
Intuitively, the attention vector ˆmmmt
i is supposed to represent
the attributes of the objectoi relevant to the symbolmt. Then,
the symbol-object matching scores are computed by taking
the dot product between the attention vector and each sym-
bol vector: st
i = ˆmmmt⊤
i mmmt. Finally, the symbol-object matching
scores are averaged to produce the message-object matching
score: si = 1
T ∑t st
i.
Optimization
The parameters of Speaker θS and Listener θL are both opti-
mized toward the task success.
Speaker is trained with the REINFORCE algo-
rithm (Williams, 1992). The message decoder produces
the probability distribution of which symbol to generate
πθS (·|t) at each time step t. At training time, message
symbols are randomly sampled according to the predicted
probabilities and the loss function for the Speaker message
policy is Lπ(θS) = ∑t r log(πθS (mt|t)) where mt denotes
the t-th symbol in the message. The reward r is set to 1 if
Listener selects the correct target object from the candidate
set and 0 otherwise.
As an auxiliary loss function, we employ an entropy regu-
larization loss LH (θS) =− ∑t H
(
πθS (·|t)
)
, where H is the en-
tropy of a probability distribution, to encourage exploration.
We also add a KL lossLKL(θS) = ∑t DKL
(
πθS (·|t)∥π¯θS (·|t)
)
,
where the policy π¯θS is obtained by taking an exponential
moving average of the weights of θS over training, to sta-
bilize the training (Chaabouni et al., 2022). In summary, the
ﬁnal speaker loss isL(θS) = Lπ(θS) +αLH (θS) +βLKL(θS),
where α and β are hyperparameters.
Listener is trained with a multi-class classiﬁcation loss.
The message-object matching scores are converted through
the softmax operation to pθL (oi|C), the probability of choos-
ing the object oi as the target from the candidate set C. Then
Listener is trained to maximize the probability of predicting
the target object by minimizing the loss function L(θL) =
−log pθL (otgt|C).
Evaluation Metrics
We quantitatively evaluate emergent languages from how
well the language can be used to solve the task and how well
the language exhibits compositionality.
Training accuracy (TrainAcc) measures the task perfor-
mance with objects seen during training. This indicates how
the agent architectures are simply effective to solve the refer-
ential game.
Generalization accuracy (GenAcc) measures the task per-
formance with objects unseen during training. We split the
distinct object types in the game into train and evaluation sets
and the generalization accuracy is computed with the evalua-
tion set. As each object can be represented as a combination
of attribute values, what we expect for the agents is to learn
to combine symbols denoting each attribute value in a sys-
tematic way so that the language can express unseen combi-
nations of known attribute values.
Topographic similarity (TopSim), also known as Represen-
tational Similarity Analysis (Kriegeskorte, Mur, & Bandet-
tini, 2008), is one of the most commonly used metrics to
assess the compositionality of emergent language (Brighton
& Kirby, 2006; Lazaridou, Hermann, Tuyls, & Clark, 2018;
Ren et al., 2020; Chaabouni, Kharitonov, Bouchacourt,
Dupoux, & Baroni, 2020). Intuitively, TopSim checks if
similar objects have similar messages assigned. To com-
pute TopSim, we enumerate all the object-message pairs
{(o1,m1), ....,(o|O|,m|O|)} with a trained Speaker and de-
ﬁne a distance function for objects dO(oi,o j) and messages
dM (mi,m j). Then we compute Spearman’s correlation be-
tween pairwise distances in the object and message space. For
the distance function for objects dO(oi,o j), we use the cosine
distance of the binary attribute value vectors and for the dis-
tance function of messages dM (mi,m j) the edit distance of
message symbols.

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
(a) TrainAcc
 (b) GenAcc
 (c) TopSim
Figure 2: The results of the referential game. The color of the boxes indicates the base architecture of the agents (LSTM or
Transformer) and the x-axis labels indicates whether Speaker and Listener use attention.
Experimental Setup
Fashion-MNIST Game
Attention has been shown to be able to associate a symbol
and a relevant region of an image to solve the task (Xu et
al., 2015; Yang et al., 2016). To develop human-like emer-
gent languages, one important question is whether the at-
tention agents develop an interpretable language such that
we can understand the meaning of each symbol by inspect-
ing the attended region. For this purpose, we design a
multi-item image referential game using the Fashion-MNIST
dataset1 (Xiao, Rasul, & V ollgraf, 2017).
The game objective is to communicate a type of object
between Speaker and Listener. Each object is deﬁned as a
combination of two classes from the Fashion-MNIST dataset
(e.g., T-shirt and Sneaker). As the dataset has 10 classes,
there are a total of 10C2 = 45 object types. These 45 types
are randomly split into training and evaluation sets at a ratio
of 30/15, and the number of candidates is set to 15.
The FashionMNIST items on the images are spatially dis-
entangled and ideal for evaluating attention mechanisms.
While learning to attend to abstract attributes such as color
and shape in images can be more challenging, we anticipate
that it is achievable with the use of high-quality feature ex-
tractors and learning conﬁgurations.
Input Representation
Each object is presented to the agents as feature vectors ex-
tracted from a pixel image. The image is created by placing
on a 224× 224 black canvas two item images, each of which
is rescaled to the size of 48 × 48 (Figure 3). The places are
randomly sampled so that the items never overlap.
The speciﬁc item images and their positions are randomly
sampled every time the agents process the objects both during
training and evaluation time to avoid degenerated solutions
that exploit spurious features of an image (Lazaridou et al.,
2018; Bouchacourt & Baroni, 2018). Also, the Speaker and
Listener are presented as the target object with two images de-
picting the same item types, but with different instances and
locations, to facilitate learning a robust communication pro-
tocol (Rodr´ıguez Luna et al., 2020; Mu & Goodman, 2021).
1https://github.com/zalandoresearch/fashion-mnist
Each image is encoded into 7 × 7× 768-dim feature vec-
tors with a pretrained ConvNet 2 (Z. Liu et al., 2022). For
non-attention models, the feature vectors are averaged across
spatial axes into a single 768-dim feature vector.
Agent Conﬁgurations
The vocabulary size of the agents is set to 20 and the mes-
sage length is 2. A perfectly compositional language would
refer to each item in the image with different symbols with a
consistent one-to-one mapping. The sizes of embeddings and
hidden sizes of the Speaker and Listener are set to 256.
The hyperparameters (Table 1) are tuned for the entropy
loss weight α. The reported scores are obtained from the top
10 agents in terms of the generalization score for each setting.
Training Batch size 480
Max Training steps 50K
Evaluation Rounds 15000
Entropy loss weight α [0.1, 0.01, 0.001]
KL loss weight β 0.1
Learning rate 1e-4
Table 1: Hyperparameters of the experiments.
Results
Attention agents ﬁnd more compositional solutions
We evaluate non-attention agents and attention agents where
either/both Speaker and Listener have dynamic attention
(Figure 2). We will not discuss the distinctions between
LSTM and Transformer as they vary in multiple aspects of
their architecture. We focus on the difference between the
non-attention and attention agents within each architecture.
We observe a general trend that the attention agents per-
form better than the non-attention baseline (NoAT-NoAT),
which is indicated by the better average scores in task gen-
eralization (GenAcc) and compositionality metrics (TopSim).
This observation provides evidence in support of the hypothe-
sis that the attention mechanism creates pressure for learning
more compositional emergent languages.
2The pretrained model is registered as convnext tiny in the
torchvision library

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
(a) Successful coordination with the same
image.
(b) Successful coordination with the dif-
ferent images with the same type.
(c) Failure case. The attention maps are
not focused.
Figure 3: Attention maps produced by a AT-AT agent pair (Left: Speaker, Right: Listener).
(a) Speaker
 (b) Listener
Figure 4: A frequency heatmap of symbol-concept associa-
tion derived from the attention weights of Transformer AT-
AT agent pairs.
One possible interpretation is that the attention mechanism
adds ﬂexibility to the model and it simply leads to better
learning of the task. We observe the effect in TrainAcc,
where the attention models consistently outperform their non-
attention baselines. However, we can still see the contribu-
tion of the attention mechanism besides the ﬂexibility. We
can see some NoAT-NoAT agents and AT-AT agents exhibit
comparable TrainAcc around 75%, which means they are suc-
cessful at optimization to a similar degree. However, we ob-
serve all the AT-AT agents signiﬁcantly outperform any of
the NoAT-NoAT agents, which indicates the degree of opti-
mization alone cannot explain the better GenAcc and TopSim
scores of the attention model. Therefore, the results supports
our initial hypothesis that the attention mechanism facilitates
developing compositional languages.
In some settings, we observe that adding the attention
mechanism to only one of Speaker and Listener does not lead
to better TopSim scores compared the NoAT-NoAT agents to
as in the AT-NoAT and NoAT-AT LSTM agents. However,
when both Speaker and Listener agents have the attention
mechanism, they all exhibit more generalizable and compo-
sitional languages, which indicates the effect of attention in
Speaker and Listener is multiplicative.
Attention agents learn to associate input attributes
and symbols
Having conﬁrmed that the attention agents give rise to more
compositional languages, we proceed to examine if they use
attention in an expected way, i.e., producing/understanding
each symbol by associating them with a single input concept.
We focus on analyzing the Transformer agents below.
We inspect the attention weights and conﬁrm that attention
agents generally learn to focus on a single object when gen-
erating a symbol as in Figure 3(a) and (b), although there are
some failure cases as shown in Figure 3(c).
Given the observations above, we can associate each sym-
bol in each message with the concepts deﬁned in the game
via attention weights. We visualize the association from a
pair of AT-AT agents in Figure 4 to inspect the mapping pat-
terns developed by the agents. A symbol is considered to be
associated with a concept when the center of gravity of the
attention weights is within the bounding box of the item in
an image. The results show that the mappings learned by
Speaker and Listener have a strong tendency to agree in al-
most all cases. We identify three types of symbol-to-concept
mapping patterns.
Monosemy. A single symbol always refers to a single con-
cept, e.g., a, e, and g. This is a desired mapping pattern that
allows an unambiguous interpretation of symbols.
Polysemy. A single symbol refers to multiple concepts, e.g.,
b, c, and d. These symbols are somewhat ambiguous, but
they seem to be affected by the visual similarity of the fashion
items, e.g., b refers to tops (Pullover, Coat, and Shirt) and
f refers to shoes (Sandal, Sneaker, and Boot). This pattern
demonstrates that the semantics of emergent language can be
heavily inﬂuenced by the property of the input objects.
Gibberish. We observe a few cases where the attention
weights do not consistently focus on any particular regions,
e.g., the symbol i. These gibberish symbols could have con-
veyed something informative but uninterpretable to humans,
but we conﬁrmed that this indicates the results of optimiza-
tion failure. We run 10 rounds of referential games with
45 candidates with a single agent pair, and the communica-
tion success rate is much lower when the Speaker’s message
contained gibberish symbols, compared to the overall score
(27.7 < 45.3).
The coordination of Speaker and Listener attentions
predicts the task performance
An important prerequisite of successful communication is
the participants engaging in joint attention and establishing
a shared understanding of each word (Garrod & Pickering,
2004). Here we show that the degree of the alignment be-
tween Speaker’s and Listener’s attention weights can be re-
garded as a proxy of their mutual understanding and predic-
tive of communication success.

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
Figure 5: The distribution of attention discrepancy scores
from the trials of the AT-AT agents. The frequency is nor-
malized within successful and failed trials respectively.
We deﬁne a metric called attention discrepancy , which
measures the difference between the attention weights of
Speaker and Listener given the same inputs. For each symbol
mt in a message, Speaker and Listener have attention weights
aaa(S)
t ,aaa(L)
t . The metric is calculated by computing the average
of the Jensen–Shannon Divergence (Lin, 1991) between the
attention maps: 1
T ∑T
t=1 DJS
(
aaa(S)
t ∥aaa(L)
t
)
.
Figure 5 shows the distributions of attention discrepancy
scores within successful and failed communications. These
distributions are signiﬁcantly dissimilar ( p < 0.001 in the
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test), with successful communications
exhibiting lower scores than failed communications The re-
sults indicate a correlation between attention weight align-
ment and communication success to some degree. This sug-
gests that attention agents develop intuitive communication
protocols that rely on a shared understanding of symbols.
Related Work
Emergent Language
Emergent language should exhibit compositionality, allow-
ing interpretability, generalizability, and ease of learning (Li
& Bowling, 2019; Ren et al., 2020). Existing studies have
shown that the compositionality of language can be improved
by learning across generations (Li & Bowling, 2019; Ren
et al., 2020), learning with a population (Rita, Strub, et al.,
2022), applying noise to the communication channel (Łukasz
Kuci´nski et al., 2021), and balancing the learning speed of the
agents (Rita, Tallec, et al., 2022).
While recent studies have primarily used simple RNN-
based Speaker and Listener agents, other agent architectures
have been employed for speciﬁc purposes. For example,
Chaabouni et al. (2019) and Ryo et al. (2022) used the LSTM
sequence-to-sequence (with attention) architecture to study
transduction from a grammar-generated input to an emergent
language. Evtimova et al. (2018) compared attentional and
non-attentional agents in a multi-modal and multi-step ref-
erential game, observing improvements in the out-of-domain
test but not the in-domain test. However, it is unclear whether
these trends generalize to other settings.
Our study aims to investigate the impact of the model ar-
chitecture’s inductive biases on the compositionality of the
emergent language. Similarly, Słowik et al. (2020) compared
Speaker agents that process inputs as a graph, sequence, or
bag-of-words to show that the graph architecture results in
more compositional emergent languages. Our study con-
tributes further empirical evidence in this direction, speciﬁ-
cally exploring the role of the attention mechanism.
Attention Mechanism in Machine Learning
The attention mechanism has proven effective in supervised
learning (Xu et al., 2015; Vaswani et al., 2017), becoming an
integral part of modern neural networks. Conceptually, this
mechanism models pairwise associations between a query
and a subset of key-values. This enables the model to focus
on a subpart of compositional representation and has been
shown to enforce compositional solutions in visual reason-
ing (Hudson & Manning, 2018), symbolic reasoning (Korrel,
Hupkes, Dankers, & Bruni, 2019), image generation (Hudson
& Zitnick, 2021). Our study shows that by utilizing atten-
tion to model the association between a symbol and an ob-
ject attribute, the agents can discover more compositional lan-
guages in a referential game without additional supervision.
Attention may also offer interpretability. Attention has
been shown to provide plausible alignment patterns between
inputs and outputs, such as source and target words in ma-
chine translation (Bahdanau et al., 2015) and image regions
and words in image captioning (Xu et al., 2015; Yang et al.,
2016). However, the alignment patterns may not always align
with human intuitions (Alkhouli, Bretschner, & Ney, 2018;
F. Liu et al., 2020) and there is an ongoing debate about the
extent to which the attention weights can be used as explana-
tions for model predictions (Jain & Wallace, 2019; Wiegreffe
& Pinter, 2019; Bibal et al., 2022). In this paper, our agents
exhibit relatively straightforward attention patterns that allow
for unambiguous interpretations. However, the interpretabil-
ity of attention weights with more complex models and envi-
ronments requires further investigation.
Discussion and Conclusion
When we seek to interpret a complex object, we are likely to
dynamically change our focus on its subpart to describe the
whole (Rensink, 2000). Hearing a word aids in recognizing
its referent (Boutonnet & Lupyan, 2015) and affects where to
focus in an image (Estes, Verges, & Barsalou, 2008). Mo-
tivated by these observations, we implemented agents with
the dynamic interaction between symbols and inputs in the
form of the attention mechanism. We showed that the atten-
tion agents develop more compositional languages than their
non-attention counterparts. This implies that the human ca-
pacity for dynamic focus may have contributed to developing
compositional language.
To better understand how cognitive properties shape lan-
guage, future research should explore additional architectural
variations inspired by human cognitive processing. For in-
stance, incorporating joint attention (Kwisthout et al., 2008)
into language training may enhance communication success,
as alignment between speaker and listener attention appears
to be a factor.

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
Acknowledgement
We thank the anonymous reviewers for their insightful and
helpful comments to improve the manuscript.
References
Alkhouli, T., Bretschner, G., & Ney, H. (2018). On the align-
ment problem in multi-head attention-based neural ma-
chine translation. In Proceedings of the third conference
on machine translation: Research papers.
Bahdanau, D., Cho, K., & Bengio, Y . (2015). Neural ma-
chine translation by jointly learning to align and translate.
In International conference on learning representations.
Bibal, A., Cardon, R., Alfter, D., Wilkens, R., Wang, X.,
Franc ¸ois, T., & Watrin, P. (2022). Is attention explana-
tion? an introduction to the debate. In Proceedings of the
60th annual meeting of the association for computational
linguistics (volume 1: Long papers).
Bouchacourt, D., & Baroni, M. (2018). How agents see
things: On visual representations in an emergent language
game. In Proceedings of the 2018 conference on empirical
methods in natural language processing.
Boutonnet, B., & Lupyan, G. (2015). Words jump-start vi-
sion: a label advantage in object recognition. Journal of
vision, 15 12, 11.
Brighton, H., & Kirby, S. (2006). Understanding linguis-
tic evolution by visualizing the emergence of topographic
mappings. Artiﬁcial Life, 12, 229-242.
Brinck, I. (2000). Attention and the evolution of intentional
communication. Pragmatics & Cognition, 9, 255-272.
Chaabouni, R., Kharitonov, E., Bouchacourt, D., Dupoux, E.,
& Baroni, M. (2020). Compositionality and generalization
in emergent languages. In Proceedings of the 58th annual
meeting of the association for computational linguistics.
Chaabouni, R., Kharitonov, E., Lazaric, A., Dupoux, E., &
Baroni, M. (2019). Word-order biases in deep-agent emer-
gent communication. In Proceedings of the 57th annual
meeting of the association for computational linguistics.
Chaabouni, R., Strub, F., Altch ´e, F., Tarassov, E., Tallec, C.,
Davoodi, E., . . . Piot, B. (2022). Emergent communication
at scale. In International conference on learning represen-
tations.
de Diego-Balaguer, R., Martinez-Alvarez, A., & Pons, F.
(2016). Temporal attention as a scaffold for language de-
velopment. Frontiers in Psychology, 7.
Estes, Z., Verges, M., & Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Head up,
foot down. Psychological Science, 19, 93 - 97.
Evtimova, K., Drozdov, A., Kiela, D., & Cho, K. (2018).
Emergent communication in a multi-modal, multi-step ref-
erential game. In International conference on learning rep-
resentations.
Garrod, S., & Pickering, M. J. (2004). Why is conversation
so easy? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8(1), 8 - 11. doi:
DOI: 10.1016/j.tics.2003.10.016
Hendrycks, D., & Gimpel, K. (2016). Gaussian error linear
units (gelus). ArXiv, abs/1606.08415.
Hochreiter, S., & Schmidhuber, J. (1997). Long short-term
memory. Neural Computation, 9(8), 1735–1780.
Hudson, D. A., & Manning, C. D. (2018). Compositional
attention networks for machine reasoning. In International
conference on learning representations.
Hudson, D. A., & Zitnick, C. L. (2021). Compositional trans-
formers for scene generation. In Advances in neural infor-
mation processing systems.
Jain, S., & Wallace, B. C. (2019). Attention is not Explana-
tion. In Proceedings of the 2019 conference of the north
American chapter of the association for computational lin-
guistics: Human language technologies, volume 1 (long
and short papers).
Korrel, K., Hupkes, D., Dankers, V ., & Bruni, E. (2019).
Transcoding compositionally: Using attention to ﬁnd more
generalizable solutions. In Proceedings of the 2019 acl
workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and interpreting neu-
ral networks for NLP.
Kriegeskorte, N., Mur, M., & Bandettini, P. (2008). Repre-
sentational similarity analysis - connecting the branches of
systems neuroscience. Frontiers in systems neuroscience,
2.
Kwisthout, J., V ogt, P., Haselager, W. P., & Dijkstra, T.
(2008). Joint attention and language evolution. Connec-
tion Science, 20, 155 - 171.
Lazaridou, A., & Baroni, M. (2020). Emergent multi-
agent communication in the deep learning era. ArXiv,
abs/2006.02419.
Lazaridou, A., Hermann, K. M., Tuyls, K., & Clark, S.
(2018). Emergence of linguistic communication from ref-
erential games with symbolic and pixel input. In Interna-
tional conference on learning representations.
Lazaridou, A., Peysakhovich, A., & Baroni, M. (2017).
Multi-agent cooperation and the emergence of (natural)
language. In International conference on learning repre-
sentations.
Lewis, D. K. (1969). Convention: A philosophical study .
Cambridge, MA, USA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Li, F., & Bowling, M. (2019). Ease-of-teaching and language
structure from emergent communication. In Advances in
neural information processing systems (V ol. 32).
Lin, J. (1991). Divergence measures based on the shannon
entropy. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , 37,
145-151.
Liu, F., Ren, X., Wu, X., Ge, S., Fan, W., Zou, Y ., & Sun, X.
(2020). Prophet attention: Predicting attention with future
attention. In Advances in neural information processing
systems.
Liu, Z., Mao, H., Wu, C.-Y ., Feichtenhofer, C., Darrell, T., &
Xie, S. (2022). A convnet for the 2020s. Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR).
Lowe, R., Foerster, J. N., Boureau, Y.-L., Pineau, J., &
Dauphin, Y . (2019). On the pitfalls of measuring emer-
gent communication. In Aamas.

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
Luong, T., Pham, H., & Manning, C. D. (2015). Effective ap-
proaches to attention-based neural machine translation. In
Proceedings of the 2015 conference on empirical methods
in natural language processing.
Mordatch, I., & Abbeel, P. (2018). Emergence of grounded
compositional language in multi-agent populations. In The
thirty-second aaai conference on artiﬁcial intelligence.
Mu, J., & Goodman, N. D. (2021). Emergent communica-
tion of generalizations. In Advances in neural information
processing systems (pp. 17994–18007).
Ren, Y ., Guo, S., Labeau, M., Cohen, S. B., & Kirby, S.
(2020). Compositional languages emerge in a neural iter-
ated learning model. In International conference on learn-
ing representations.
Rensink, R. A. (2000). The dynamic representation of scenes.
Visual Cognition, 7, 17 - 42.
Rita, M., Strub, F., Grill, J., Pietquin, O., & Dupoux, E.
(2022). On the role of population heterogeneity in emer-
gent communication. In International conference on learn-
ing representations.
Rita, M., Tallec, C., Michel, P., Grill, J.-B., Pietquin, O.,
Dupoux, E., & Strub, F. (2022). Emergent communication:
Generalization and overﬁtting in lewis games. InAdvances
in neural information processing systems.
Rodr´ıguez Luna, D., Ponti, E. M., Hupkes, D., & Bruni, E.
(2020). Internal and external pressures on language emer-
gence: least effort, object constancy and frequency. In
Findings of the association for computational linguistics:
EMNLP 2020.
Ryo, U., Taiga, I., Koki, W., & Yusuke, M. (2022). Catego-
rial grammar induction as a compositionality measure for
emergent languages in signaling games. In Proceedings of
emergent communication workshop at iclr 2022.
Słowik, A., Gupta, A. K., Hamilton, W. L., Jamnik, M.,
Holden, S., & Pal, C. J. (2020). Structural inductive bi-
ases in emergent communication. In Proceedings of the
43rd annual meeting of the cognitive science society.
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L.,
Gomez, A. N., . . . Polosukhin, I. (2017). Attention is all
you need. In Advances in neural information processing
systems (V ol. 30).
Wiegreffe, S., & Pinter, Y . (2019). Attention is not not expla-
nation. In Proceedings of the 2019 conference on empirical
methods in natural language processing and the 9th inter-
national joint conference on natural language processing
(EMNLP-IJCNLP).
Williams, R. J. (1992). Simple statistical gradient-following
algorithms for connectionist reinforcement learning. Ma-
chine Learning, 8(3–4), 229–256.
Xiao, H., Rasul, K., & V ollgraf, R. (2017). Fashion-mnist:
a novel image dataset for benchmarking machine learning
algorithms. ArXiv, abs/1708.07747.
Xu, K., Ba, J., Kiros, R., Cho, K., Courville, A. C., Salakhut-
dinov, R., . . . Bengio, Y . (2015). Show, attend and tell:
Neural image caption generation with visual attention. In
Proceedings of the international conference on machine
learning (V ol. 37).
Yang, Z., He, X., Gao, J., Deng, L., & Smola, A. (2016).
Stacked attention networks for image question answering.
In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recog-
nition (CVPR).
Łukasz Kuci ´nski, Korbak, T., Kołodziej, P., & Miło ´s, P.
(2021). Catalytic role of noise and necessity of induc-
tive biases in the emergence of compositional communica-
tion. In Advances in neural information processing systems
(V ol. 34).