=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
Proceedings of the Workshop on Cognitive Modeling and Computational Linguistics , pages 57–71
August 15, 2024 ©2024 Association for Computational Linguistics
The Curious Case of Representational Alignment: Unravelling
Visio-Linguistic Tasks in Emergent Communication
Tom Kouwenhoven
LIACS
Leiden University
t.kouwenhoven@liacs.leidenuniv.nl
Max Peeperkorn
School of Computing
University of Kent
m.peeperkorn@kent.ac.uk
Bram van Dijk
LUMC
Leiden University Medical Center
b.m.a.van_dijk@lumc.nl
Tessa V erhoef
LIACS
Leiden University
t.verhoef@liacs.leidenuniv.nl
Abstract
Natural language has the universal properties
of being compositional and grounded in reality.
The emergence of linguistic properties is often
investigated through simulations of emergent
communication in referential games. However,
these experiments have yielded mixed results
compared to similar experiments addressing lin-
guistic properties of human language. Here we
address representational alignment as a poten-
tial contributing factor to these results. Specifi-
cally, we assess the representational alignment
between agent image representations and be-
tween agent representations and input images.
Doing so, we confirm that the emergent lan-
guage does not appear to encode human-like
conceptual visual features, since agent image
representations drift away from inputs whilst
inter-agent alignment increases. We moreover
identify a strong relationship between inter-
agent alignment and topographic similarity, a
common metric for compositionality, and ad-
dress its consequences. To address these issues,
we introduce an alignment penalty that prevents
representational drift but interestingly does not
improve performance on a compositional dis-
crimination task. Together, our findings em-
phasise the key role representational alignment
plays in simulations of language emergence.
1 Introduction
Human language bears unique properties that make
it a powerful tool for communication. A well-
known property is compositionality: the ability
to combine meaningful words into more complex
meanings (Hockett, 1959). The emergence of com-
positionality is studied extensively in the field of
language evolution through human experiments
(e.g. Selten and Warglien, 2007; Kirby et al., 2008,
2015; Raviv et al., 2019a). An important finding
from this field is that the unique nature of human
language can be explained as a consequence of
biases for simplicity and expressivity imposed dur-
ing continuous language learning and use (Smith,
2022). Computational simulations of language
emergence have also been used to study the emer-
gence of linguistic properties (e.g. de Boer, 2006;
Steels and Loetzsch, 2012), and have seen a ris-
ing interest in the field of computational linguistics
(Lazaridou and Baroni, 2020). Here, composition-
ality in the emergent communication protocols is
commonly measured through topographic similar-
ity (TOPSIM ; Brighton and Kirby, 2006). It mea-
sures the topographic relation between meanings
and signals, conceptually it gauges whether simi-
lar meanings map to similar signals. This metric
was first used in recent computational simulations
by Lazaridou et al. (2018) and has been used in
a large body of work since. Yet, the interpreta-
tion of linguistic properties emerging in simula-
tions remains challenging, since language proto-
cols used among artificial agents often show crit-
ical mismatches with known properties of human
languages (Galke et al., 2022; Lian et al., 2023)
such as efficiency, word-order vs. case-marking
biases, or compositional generalisation (see §2).
Consequently, it is evident that their learning biases
and signal-meaning mappings differ from those of
humans. This underscores the critical need to ob-
tain deeper insight into referential games in the
language learning setting (Rita et al., 2022).
A possible explanation for these mismatches
could stem from representational alignment, the
degree of agreement between the internal repre-
sentations of two information processing systems
(Sucholutsky et al., 2023). To the best of our knowl-
edge, representational alignment in emergent com-
munication was first reported by (Bouchacourt and
Baroni, 2018), who measured the degree to which
57

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
agents aligned their internal image interpretations
(inter-agent alignment) by performing Represen-
tational Similarity Analysis ( RSA; Kriegeskorte
et al., 2008). Using RSA (§3), they showed that
agents establish successful communication artifi-
cially by aligning their internal image representa-
tions while losing any relation to the images pre-
sented (image-agent alignment), enabling commu-
nication about noise input even though they were
trained on real images. As such, their communica-
tion protocol captured not conceptual properties of
the objects depicted in pictures, but most likely fo-
cused on non-human-like spurious image features
(e.g., pixel intensities). While inter-agent align-
ment is not a problem per se, the loss of image-
agent alignment is problematic for two reasons.
First, for emergent communication simulations to
provide meaningful insights into the emergence of
natural human language, agent image representa-
tions must be grounded in the content of the im-
ages. Only then can we deduce what the agents
communicate about and assess linguistic properties
or their ability to generalise to novel concepts. Sec-
ond, emergent communication setups have been
proposed to fine-tune pre-trained (vision-)language
models, aiming to enhance machine understanding
of natural human language (Lazaridou and Baroni,
2020; Lowe et al., 2020; Steinert-Threlkeld et al.,
2022; Zheng et al., 2024). In this context, maintain-
ing substantial alignment between representations
and images is crucial for preserving mutual under-
standing between machines and humans.
Representational alignment, however, did not
receive the necessary attention since a host of pa-
pers appeared after the findings by Bouchacourt
and Baroni in which results on referential games
were reported without taking RSA into account
(e.g. Lazaridou et al., 2018; Guo et al., 2019; Li
and Bowling, 2019; Ren et al., 2020; Chaabouni
et al., 2020; Dagan et al., 2021; Mu and Good-
man, 2021; Chaabouni et al., 2022). Admittedly,
some use attribute-value objects instead of real im-
ages as input. But importantly, in nearly all cases,
neural agents must map inputs—whether attribute-
value objects or image representations—onto agent-
specific representations. Therefore the problem of
inter-agent alignment can always occur and is ag-
nostic to the input type. Although this warrants fur-
ther analysis of earlier results, the field is already
employing referential games in more complex sim-
ulations with real images (e.g. Dessi et al., 2021;
Chaabouni et al., 2022; Mahaut et al., 2024).
This work addresses the understudied alignment
problem in standard referential game setups used
in emergent communication. We train Reinforce-
ment Learning (RL) agents equipped with a recent
vision module (DinoV2; Oquab et al., 2024) to
communicate about images. In addition to evalu-
ating the agents on MS COCO (Lin et al., 2014)
image pairs, we evaluate on noise pairs and im-
age pairs sourced from the Winoground dataset
(Thrush et al., 2022). The latter is explicitly created
to gauge visio-linguistic compositional reasoning
abilities of vision and language models. We first
confirm that effective communication in the ref-
erential game relies on inter-agent alignment and
then move on to our contributions. First, we find a
strong correlation between the degree of inter-agent
alignment and the TOPSIM metric. Our second con-
tribution consists of a solution to the alignment
problem by including an alignment penalty term
to the loss, resulting in equivalent communicative
success and higher TOPSIM whilst ensuring that the
agents communicate about images instead of spuri-
ous features (Figure 1). We then argue to start eval-
uating emergent communication protocols on more
strict tasks that directly target the intuition behind
popular metrics to obtain a clearer understanding
of the protocols. Overall, our results highlight the
importance of representational alignment in simu-
lations of language emergence and underscore the
need to better understand the divergence in human
and artificial language emergence.
2 Background
Most research in simulating emergent communica-
tion is modelled after the Lewis signalling game
(Lewis, 1969) with a speaker and a listener agent.
The speaker observes a state (e.g., an image) and
sends a signal to the listener who acts based on
this signal. In the case of the referential game, this
means selecting a target among distractors. Both
agents are rewarded for successful communication,
meaning the listener points to the target object. The
solution of this game requires the agents to have a
shared protocol (i.e., an artificial language) which
typically emerges when the agents learn based on
trial and error over multiple games. This resem-
bles how for humans, language learning and use
impose constraints like pressures for learnability
and compression that shape our language design
(Kirby et al., 2014, 2015). Importantly, the emer-
58

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
(a) Communicative performance (Accu-
racy) on discriminating two images.
(b) Inter-agent representational alignment
(RSA sl) between agent representations.
(c) Topographic similarity (TOPSIM ) be-
tween the images and the messages.
Figure 1: Inference results for different datasets after training on MS COCO images. In (a) we see that agents can
discriminate MS COCO images but struggle with discriminating Winoground images. In (b) we see the effect of the
loss function on the degree of inter-agent representational alignment and (c) implies that according to the TOPSIM
metric, messages are more structured if the alignment penalty is used. The presented results are across 15 seeds and
use the best-performing parameters resulting from our parameter sweep, dashed green lines indicate averages.
gent language in this setup is also shaped by biases
resulting from, for example, the agent architecture,
loss function, and learning protocol (Rita et al.,
2022). The current work uses the referential game:
a variant of the Lewis signalling game extensively
used to explore language evolution (e.g. Steels and
Loetzsch, 2012; Kirby et al., 2015; Lazaridou et al.,
2017; Kottur et al., 2017; Lazaridou et al., 2018;
Kharitonov et al., 2020; Chaabouni et al., 2022).
An important challenge in emergent communi-
cation is that artificial learners often do not be-
have the same way as human learners in experi-
mental settings. Some emergent protocols do not
follow Zipf’s law and thus are anti-efficient unless
pressures for brevity are introduced (Chaabouni
et al., 2019a), others do not show the word-order
vs. case-marking trade-off found in human lan-
guages (Chaabouni et al., 2019b; Lian et al., 2021).
Additionally, there is an ongoing debate on the de-
gree to which the emergent languages allow for
compositional generalisation (Lazaridou and Ba-
roni, 2020; Conklin and Smith, 2023). It has been
suggested to introduce communicative (e.g., alter-
nating speaker/listener roles) and cognitive (e.g.,
memory) constraints (Galke et al., 2022) and use
more natural settings to promote more human-like
patterns of language emergence with neural agents
(Kouwenhoven et al., 2022). Doing so changes
the learning pressures to which the agents need
to adapt and can recover initially absent linguistic
phenomena of natural language in emergent lan-
guages (for a review see Galke and Raviv, 2024).
An example of such work, investigating the word-
order vs. case-marking trade-off, has succeeded in
replicating this trade-off for neural learners (Lian
et al., 2023). Their setup differs from other work
in that agents first learn a miniature language via
supervised learning, and then optimise it for com-
municative success via RL, resulting in emergent
languages that share linguistic universals with hu-
man language.
To enhance understanding of emergent commu-
nication in the Lewis game, Rita et al. (2022) de-
composed the standard objective in Lewis games
into two key components: a co-adaptation loss and
an information loss. In doing so, they shed light on
potential sources of overfitting and how they might
hinder the emergence of structured communication
protocols. They demonstrated that desired linguis-
tic properties (e.g., compositionality and general-
isability) emerge when they control the listener’s
ability to converge to the speaker agent (i.e., control
for overfitting on the co-adaptation loss). While
the co-adaptation loss has parallels to inter-agent
alignment, their work does not address the align-
ment between the agents’ image representation and
the input features, which we deem crucial in devel-
oping grounded communication protocols.
Another challenge in emergent communication
is the disentanglement of the underlying meanings
of emergent languages. Earlier studies by Lazari-
dou et al. (2017) suggested that agents assign sym-
bols to general conceptual properties of objects
in images, rather than low-level visual features.
However, as previously mentioned, follow-up work
from Bouchacourt and Baroni (2018) showed this
is not always the case. They found that agents
align their agent-specific image representations
without developing a language that captures con-
ceptual properties depicted in the images. More-
59

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
over, agents lost any sense of meaningful within-
category variation where two similar objects in
human perception (e.g., two avocados) were ob-
served as maximally dissimilar for the agents. In
response to these findings, recent studies have im-
plemented sanity checks, testing whether trained
agents can communicate about noise (Dessi et al.,
2021; Mahaut et al., 2024). However, to the best
of our knowledge, there has been little attention
to what we consider to be their main result: the
alignment problem.
3 Representational alignment
Representational alignment is the degree of agree-
ment between the internal representations of two in-
formation processing systems, whether biological
or artificial. Even though widely recognised in cog-
nitive science, neuroscience, and machine learning
(Sucholutsky et al., 2023), representational align-
ment has not seen much interest in the field of
emergent communication, except for the work by
Bouchacourt and Baroni who analysed the refer-
ential game using RSA. This metric measures the
alignment between two sets of numerical vectors,
for example, image embeddings and agents’ rep-
resentations thereof. In practice, it is calculated
by taking the pairwise (cosine) distances between
vectors of a set and calculating the Spearman rank
correlation between these distances.
In this paper, we also use RSA to operationalise
representational alignment. Given the speaker im-
age representations rs of the DinoV2 input em-
beddingsi andrl as the same images represented
in the listener representation space, we compute
the pairwise cosine similarity between the repre-
sentations for the speaker ss and for the listener
sl and calculate Spearman’sρbetweenss andsl.
As such, this measures the degree of inter-agent
alignment (RSA sl) between image representations
ss andsl, relative to their input. Additionally, we
use it to measure image-agent alignment between
the speaker/listener image representations and the
DinoV2 embeddings ( RSA si and RSA li). Impor-
tantly, alignment is agnostic to the type of input ,
being either images or attribute-value objects and
can always happen when inputs are projected onto
agent-specific representations.
Intuitively, a high inter-agent RSA sl value can
be interpreted as agents with similar representa-
tions for similar images. Importantly, this can have
two causes: both agents’ image representations
either maintain a relation to the image input, or
lose this relation. While the former is desirable,
the latter means that the agents are not communi-
cating about the same high-level image features
but are likely communicating about non-human-
like spurious features. A low RSA sl value entails
that the agents have developed different interpre-
tations for the same image. While this may well
be similar to the question of whether people have
different perceptual experiences of colour (Locke,
1847), in the case of emergent communication, the
agents should develop a grounded vocabulary with
overlapping concept-level properties if we wish
machines to have more natural understanding of
human language. We use RSA 1) as a metric to re-
assess findings from Bouchacourt and Baroni and
2) as an auxiliary loss to mitigate the alignment
problem and ensure that the agents communicate
about image features.
4 Methods
The standard referential game is used as provided
by the EGG framework (Kharitonov et al., 2021).
Doing so ensures our findings are representative
of the widely-used setup, rather than being influ-
enced by specific design decisions. The game is
implemented as a multi-agent cooperative RL prob-
lem where a speaker and a listener communicate
to discriminate a target image from two shuffled
distractor images. The speaker receives a target
t and generates a messagem of at most lengthL,
using vocabularyV . Importantly, the messages and
symbols have no a priori meaning but are assumed
to obtain meaning and become grounded during the
game. Once meaningful, the symbols are ideally
combined in a structured manner to create compo-
sitional messages that express more complex mean-
ings. Using message m, the listener guesses the
target ˆt. Communicative success is defined asˆt =t,
meaning that the listener has correctly identified
the target image among the candidate images.
4.1 Agents
Agents contain a language and a vision module.
The latter consists of a frozen pre-trained visual
network (DinoV2) and a learned agent-specific rep-
resentation layer. While difficult to know what
conceptual image features are present in DinoV2
embeddings, they have demonstrated capability in
semantic segmentation tasks (Oquab et al., 2024),
which is similar to the agents’ objective. In contrast
60

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
to the hybrid structure of the vision module, the
language module is entirely trained from scratch.
The speaker agent processes images by applying
a linear transformation to the image embeddings,
followed by batch normalisation, to create its agent-
specific image representationrs. Its language mod-
ule embeds this representation and passes it through
a single-layer Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU; Cho
et al., 2014) that spells out messages to describe
the target. The listener receives the message and
the distractor images. It encodes the message into
an embedding using another single-cell GRU layer.
Additionally, a listener image representationrl is
obtained for each image by applying a linear trans-
formation and batch normalisation. Subsequently,
temperature-weighted (temperature defaults to 0.1)
cosine scores construct a multi-modal representa-
tion between the image and message representation
(Dessi et al., 2021), where a higher probability
should be assigned to the target image.
4.2 Optimisation
Communicative success ( ˆt = t) is used to opti-
mise the trainable parameters of both agents. The
listener minimises cross-entropy ( ce) loss using
stochastic gradient descent, amounting to super-
vised learning. The ce loss is calculated over the
listeners’ target distribution, thus providing direct
pressure for communicative success. At inference,
the candidate image with the highest probability
is chosen as the target ˆt. The gradients required
to optimise the speaker are calculated using the
REINFORCE (Williams, 1992) update rule as each
generated symbol must be assigned a loss. Follow-
ing common practice (Rita et al., 2024), entropy
regularisation (Mnih et al., 2016) is added to the
loss to maintain exploration in message generation.
In addition to the conventionalce loss, we intro-
duce an alignment loss (ce + RSA) that includes an
alignment penalty term to enforce high inter-agent
and image-agent alignment. The term
LRSA = (1−RSA sl) + (1−RSA si) + (1−RSA li)
is added to thece loss with equal importance. We
use torchsort (Blondel et al., 2020) to calculate
LRSA such that the entire loss term is differentiable.
Importantly,LRSA is not influenced by commu-
nicative success and does not interact with thece
loss (Appendix C). Only adding RSA sl to the ce
loss is not sufficient as high inter-agent alignment
can be achieved while losing image-agent align-
ment (see §3). We therefore also include RSA si
Figure 2: Exemplar pairs of each dataset used for eval-
uation. Left: an image pair from MS COCO. Middle:
A Winoground example. Right: A Gaussian noise pair.
All images are cropped for display purposes.
and RSA li to ensure that the agents communicate
about the content displayed in the images. Includ-
ing RSA sl entails that representational information
is shared between the agents, thus differing from
how humans interact. Yet, ranking the speaker and
listener representations in calculating RSA sl bears
some resemblance to projecting beliefs upon the
interpretations of the other communicative part-
ner. The current solution should be seen as a step
towards more grounded vocabularies prone to re-
finements such as cognitive plausibility. We train
for 30 epochs regardless of the loss used. The hy-
perparameters (Appendix B) that resulted in the
best validation accuracy across 42 different com-
munication channel capacities (Appendix A) were
used for our findings.
4.3 Data
Agents are trained to discriminate MS COCO im-
ages but tested on three different datasets (Figure 2)
to assess out-of-distribution (o.o.d.) performance.
MS COCO – We use a subset of 1200 images
from the MS COCO 2017 validation set to train and
test the agents using an 80/20 split. To obtain this
subset, we first select the categories that contain
more than 100 images (12 categories) and subse-
quently sample 100 images for each supercategory
present in the resulting set of images. The distrac-
tor images are sampled from the same category to
ensure that there is some relevance to the target
image. Importantly, sampling distractor images is
done for each batch, meaning targets have different
distractors at each epoch.
Winoground – The Winoground dataset (Thrush
et al., 2022) was created to assess the visio-
61

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
(a) Learning curves for the MS COCO dataset on train and
validation data.
(b) Representational alignment between agent image represen-
tations (green) and between the image and the sender/listener
representations (purple, red).
Figure 3: In (a) we see that the agents learn to commu-
nicate successfully without overfitting on train data. In
(b) we see that the alignment problem occurs with the
ce but not the ce + RSA loss. Line style indicates the
loss type. Data is averaged over 15 seeds, areas indicate
the 95% confidence intervals.
linguistic compositional reasoning abilities of vi-
sion and language models. Here, we repurpose
it as a proxy for the agents’ ability to endow in
compositional reasoning for image-based settings.
The dataset contains 800 images and correspond-
ing captions, comprising 400 Winoground pairs.
Image-caption pairs were included when the cap-
tions share the same words but are of differentcom-
positions, implying completely different semantics
(e.g., “a tree smashed into a car” versus “a car
smashed into a tree” in Figure 2 (middle)). We only
use the image pairs, not the captions. Crucially,
this task differs from MS COCO since the image
pairs are fixed, conceptually similar and meant to
be discriminative if the agents’ language allows
for compositional reasoning and is grounded in the
visual modality.
Noise – Following Bouchacourt and Baroni
(2018), we test whether agents can communicate
about Gaussian noise (µ= 0,σ= 1 ) pairs when
trained on real images. Being able to do so would
imply that messages communicate about spurious
instead of high-level concept features.
4.4 Metrics
The performance of our agents is assessed by com-
municative success (accuracy) and RSA (§3) mea-
sures alignment. The degree of compositionality
in the emergent language is assessed through the
TOPSIM metric. Other metrics for compositionality
like positional disentanglement, bag-of-symbols
disentanglement (Chaabouni et al., 2020) are not
straightforward due to the continuous nature of the
image embeddings.
5 Results
5.1 Communicative success
Unsurprisingly, results show that agents can suc-
cessfully disambiguate between image pairs from
MS COCO using an emergent language (Figure 3a).
Notably, we also confirm previous observations by
(Bouchacourt and Baroni, 2018) that agents trained
on real images can communicate about Gaussian
noise (Figure 1a). Thus again suggesting that
the messages convey spurious features rather than
concept-level information. Interestingly, their per-
formance on Gaussian noise is comparable to the
performance on Winoground pairs, which requires
the messages to capture concept-level properties.
Thus revealing the difficulty of discriminating be-
tween strict pairs of conceptually similar images.
The observed decrease in o.o.d. performance aligns
with findings from other studies, such as Lazaridou
et al. (2018) and Conklin and Smith (2023).
5.2 The alignment problem
The solid lines in Figure 3b clearly show that inter-
agent alignment increases while alignment sensi-
tivity to image features decreases for both agents.
In principle, it is not a problem that the agents’
image representations align. However, it is prob-
lematic when the alignment between the image em-
beddings and the image representations declines.
Ablations across different channel capacities (§A)
and pre-trained vision modules (§D) showed that
62

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
these trends appear consistently and are not influ-
enced by the capacity or type of vision model. In
addition to the communicative success on Gaussian
noise, this re-confirms that the agents do not learn
to extract concept-level information from the image
embeddings but instead solve this task differently.
5.3 TOPSIM and representational alignment
Figure 4: The relationship between TOPSIM and inter-
agent alignment (RSA sl) for both loss types.
Earlier findings show mixed results on the re-
lationship between TOPSIM and generalisation in
image-based settings, TOPSIM was either related
to generalisation (Chaabouni et al., 2022) or not
(Rita et al., 2022). Our results indicate that gen-
eralisation and TOPSIM are correlated with both
ce (r =.856,p<. 001) and ce + RSA (r =.767,
p<. 001) losses. Meaning that more structured
languages enable better communication on un-
seen validation pairs. Moreover, we find a strong
positive relationship between RSA sl and TOPSIM
(r =.838,p<. 001) in thece (Figure 4). This rela-
tion is also present in thece + RSA setup (r =.408,
p =.001), but is decoupled from TOPSIM given the
(very) small spread (σ=.003) of RSA sl. We do
not observe an influence of inter-agent alignment
on the number of uniquely produced messages.
5.4 Mitigating the alignment problem
We now focus on the ce + RSA setup which was
introduced to ensure that the agents maintain align-
ment with the image embeddings. Figure 3b shows
that this is the case: inter-agent alignment and
agent-image alignment increase during training and
remain high at inference. However, there does not
seem to be a benefit for communicative success
at inference time (Figure 1). This is because the
alignment penalty only forces agents to represent
images similarly to the image embeddings and is
independent of the cross-entropy loss used to as-
sess the success of communication (Appendix C).
In the case of noise images, we still observe the
above-chance performance, suggesting that com-
munication between the agents still occurs in an
artificial manner.
The alignment penalty also leads to increased
TOPSIM , indicating a higher level of structure (Fig-
ure 1c) and strengthens our finding that TOPSIM
and inter-agent alignment are related. Suggesting
that the observed variations in TOPSIM , whether
higher or lower, as noted in previous studies (e.g.
Kottur et al., 2017; Chaabouni et al., 2020), should
not be interpreted without considering alignment
since they may be attributable to this underlying
artefact rather than alterations to the original setup.
When tested on more strict Winoground pairs,
communicative success does not improve as a result
of using the alignment penalty (Figure 1a). Given
the correlation between TOPSIM and generalisation,
this is surprising since the higher degree ofTOPSIM
should imply that the language is more structured.
Moreover, both, RSA si and RSA li have not drifted
away from the image features. This combination,
in theory, should be ideal for discriminating image
pairs from the Winoground dataset since it was
designed to be discriminative with compositional
visio-linguistic reasoning. However, in practice
this is not the case.
6 Discussion
In this work, we revisited the representational align-
ment problem in a common setup used in emergent
communication and proposed a solution to this un-
derrepresented problem. We corroborated earlier
findings by showing that agents align their image
representations and rely on spurious image features
instead of human-like concept-level information
(Bouchacourt and Baroni, 2018). We then showed
that inter-agent alignment strongly correlates with
the commonly used TOPSIM metric. Our solution
to the alignment problem involves an alignment
penalty that forces the agents to remain aligned
with the input features and mitigates the alignment
problem without decreasing communicative suc-
cess. Finally, when agents are tested on more chal-
lenging Winoground pairs we observed reasonable
but lower performance regardless of whether im-
age representations were similar to the image em-
63

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
beddings or not. With this work, we hope that
the alignment problem will receive more attention
in the field of emergent communication, as is al-
ready the case in adjacent fields (Sucholutsky et al.,
2023).
6.1 Importance of representational alignment
It is common practice in simulations of emergent
communication to process (visual) inputs into an
agent-specific hidden representation and update
their weights simultaneously (e.g. Lazaridou et al.,
2017; Bouchacourt and Baroni, 2018; Chaabouni
et al., 2019a, 2020; Rita et al., 2022). As such, inter-
agent alignment, irrespective of the input form ,
likely happens in other simulations too. This phe-
nomenon is therefore potentially widespread and
perhaps the cause for findings that are at odds with
experimental findings. While it is not always the
case that the representation structure we expect to
help solve a task will do so (e.g. Montero et al.,
2021; Xu et al., 2022), such discrepancies may hin-
der the use of emergent communication models in
developing a more natural understanding of human
languages and leave them less suitable for directly
simulating language evolution phenomena. Espe-
cially if we want machine representations of natural
language to align with human representations (Su-
cholutsky et al., 2023). RSA should therefore be
used to rule out, or at the bare minimum report
about, representational alignment in the future.
6.2 TOPSIM and representational alignment
Measuring representational alignment using RSA
is similar to how TOPSIM measures the structure
in messages. They differ in their inputs but both
calculate the Spearman-ranked correlation between
metric-agnostic pairwise distances. Crucially, the
input makes all the difference, the inputs for RSA
are from both agents and are trained independently,
whilst TOPSIM only assesses the relation between
the fixed inputs and learned output. Despite the
similarities, the metrics thus describe different phe-
nomena and are rarely reported simultaneously.
We hypothesise that the relationship between
TOPSIM and inter-agent representational alignment
is a by-product of the setup, which in essence im-
plies that the listener has to align its representa-
tionrl to the speaker representationrs (Rita et al.,
2022). It has to do so using only the speakers’
messages, being an abstraction of rs. A solution
to this problem is to align representations, which
eases the listeners’ training objective. If the speaker
consistently produces structured messages during
training, aligningrl tors is easier, thereby causing
higher inter-agent alignment. Essentially, this ren-
ders TOPSIM to be an indirect metric for the rate of
alignment, for which RSA sl is a direct metric. In
the context of learnability, the relationship between
TOPSIM and inter-agent alignment and the fact that
alignment always occurs can be seen as reasons for
why languages with higher TOPSIM are easier to
learn (Li and Bowling, 2019; Cheng et al., 2023).
This underscores the need to report inter-agent rep-
resentational alignment to avoid conclusions drawn
about the effect of specific interventions onTOPSIM
which may be attributable to inter-agent alignment.
6.3 Targeted o.o.d. evaluations
An important implication of our findings concerns
the standard practice of reporting o.o.d. accuracy
where the agents are tested on unseen input af-
ter training (e.g. Auersperger and Pecina, 2022;
Conklin and Smith, 2023). This should inform
about the agents’ ability to generalise from one
dataset (e.g., MS COCO) to another dataset (e.g.,
the Winoground pairs) much like human language
allows us to talk about an infinite number of situa-
tions. Crucially, this overlooks the representational
alignment problem in that we do not knowwhat the
agents are precisely generalising about. This prob-
lem can be mitigated with the alignment penalty
to assess generalisation more directly or at least
should be taken into consideration.
We assess o.o.d. performance on the more chal-
lenging Winoground pairs as a proxy for the agents’
ability to endow in compositional reasoning for
image-based settings. Good performance on the
Winoground dataset requires a grounded language
that can be used to create compositional messages
since the objects and their underlying relations
need to be described. In general, we suggest to
start evaluating simulations of referential games on
targeted strict tasks, like probing state-of-the-art vi-
sion language models on e.g., visio-compositional
(Thrush et al., 2022; Diwan et al., 2022; Hsieh
et al., 2023; Ray et al., 2023) or spatial (Kamath
et al., 2023) reasoning. Re-purposing such datasets
can reveal more directly whether agents develop
the attested communicative abilities that are triv-
ial to humans without having to rely on metrics.
Our results illustrate this through a shortcoming of
the TOPSIM metric. We observed that agents still
struggle with distinguishing pairs of conceptually
64

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
similar Winoground images even thoughTOPSIM is
higher with the alignment penalty. If the language
protocol were to communicate concept-level infor-
mation and compositional messages were created,
we should not observe this struggle, meaning that
the emerged protocols do not enable human-like
communicative success.
Interestingly, the o.o.d. performance remains
substantially above chance in thece + RSA setting.
Given that MS COCO is not a dataset for learning
to model compositionality, this delineates the limits
of what can be achieved qua performance based
on MS COCO image features in the Winoground
context. Nevertheless, this leaves open the question
of above-chance performance on Gaussian noise
with thece + RSA loss. A tentative explanation is
that the higher inter-agent alignment on noise in-
put (Mce =.428,Mce+RSA sl =.543,t =−8.71,
p<. 001) alleviates part of the problem (Figure
1b). To validate this, future experiments should
involve controlling the prior distributions of the
agents’ image encoders by training their vision
modules on different data. Doing so ensures that
they have to communicate about novel objects and
cannot rely on similar representations.
7 Conclusion
This paper revisits the underrepresented alignment
problem present in the referential game often used
in simulations of emergent communication. Specif-
ically, we focused on the problem of increasing
alignment between agent-image representations in
combination with a decreasing alignment between
the input and agent representations. We first con-
firmed that agents align their image representations
while losing connection to their input, meaning
that the emergent languages do not appear to en-
code human-like visual features. We then showed
that, in the common setup, inter-agent alignment is
related to topographic similarity, and argued that
this renders TOPSIM an indirect metric of the rate
of inter-agent alignment. To further investigate
the effects of alignment, we introduced an align-
ment penalty to mitigate the alignment problem
and showed that the communicative ability on a
strict compositionality benchmark did not improve,
leaving the question of inducing compositional gen-
eralisation in emergent communication for images
unsolved. Our findings underscore the need to bet-
ter understand the divergence between human and
artificial language emergence within the prevalent
referential setup and highlight the importance and
potential impact of representational alignment. We
hope that future work rules out or at least reports
about representational alignment.
8 Limitations
Our work has a few notable limitations. First, it
only involves the referential game. Another popular
variant, the reconstruction game (e.g. Chaabouni
et al., 2019a, 2020; Lian et al., 2021; Conklin
and Smith, 2023), requires the listener to recon-
struct the input object based on the speakers’ mes-
sage. Since this setup has a different objective
and presents different learning biases, it may have
different results. We still expect the results to be
similar as there is no pressure to retain alignment
between the image input and agent representation.
It would, however, be interesting to investigate
whether the language protocol in this scenario is
more structured than in the referential game.
Another limitation in our setup is that we only
consider the scenario with two agents, which may
be a requirement for alignment to be possible.
Since experiments with human participants show
that larger communities create more systematic lan-
guages (Raviv et al., 2019b), simulations on emer-
gent multi-agent communication with populations
of agents are also conducted, but these yield mixed
results. The emergent communication protocols of-
tentimes do not evolve to be more structured unless
explicit pressures such as population diversity or
emulation mechanisms are introduced (Rita et al.,
2022; Chaabouni et al., 2022). Michel et al. (2023)
however, showed that population setups can re-
sult in more compositional languages if agent pairs
are trained in a partitioned manner to prevent co-
adaptation. Despite the mixed results, we believe
that emergent communication with populations of
agents is ecologically more valid and could result
in different alignment effects. Much like how Tiele-
man et al. (2019) showed that autoencoders encode
better concept category representations when they
learn representations in a community-based setting
with multiple encoders and decoders collectively.
The final limitation of our study regards its
scale. While simulations of emergent communi-
cation are typically conducted on relatively small-
scale datasets, human language emergence is ac-
companied by rich and diverse multi-modal expe-
riences. Recent results in the field of computer
vision suggest that dataset diversity and scale are
65

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
the primary drivers of alignment to human repre-
sentations (Conwell et al., 2023; Muttenthaler et al.,
2023). As such, this key difference between the
setting of artificial emergent communication and
human language emergence can drive the observed
differences in representations. Due to the difficulty
of interpreting these representations, we see this as
another reason to evaluate emergent protocols on
more strict datasets with clear pragmatic value for
humans.
References
Michal Auersperger and Pavel Pecina. 2022. Defending
compositionality in emergent languages. In Proceed-
ings of the 2022 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies: Student
Research Workshop, pages 285–291, Hybrid: Seattle,
Washington + Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Mathieu Blondel, Olivier Teboul, Quentin Berthet, and
Josip Djolonga. 2020. Fast differentiable sorting and
ranking. In International Conference on Machine
Learning, pages 950–959. PMLR.
Diane Bouchacourt and Marco Baroni. 2018. How
agents see things: On visual representations in an
emergent language game. In Proceedings of the
2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 981–985, Brussels, Bel-
gium. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Henry Brighton and Simon Kirby. 2006. Understanding
linguistic evolution by visualizing the emergence of
topographic mappings. Artificial Life, 12(2):229–
242.
Rahma Chaabouni, Eugene Kharitonov, Diane Boucha-
court, Emmanuel Dupoux, and Marco Baroni. 2020.
Compositionality and generalization in emergent lan-
guages. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 4427–4442, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Rahma Chaabouni, Eugene Kharitonov, Emmanuel
Dupoux, and Marco Baroni. 2019a. Anti-efficient en-
coding in emergent communication. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32.
Curran Associates, Inc.
Rahma Chaabouni, Eugene Kharitonov, Alessandro
Lazaric, Emmanuel Dupoux, and Marco Baroni.
2019b. Word-order biases in deep-agent emergent
communication. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 5166–5175, Florence, Italy. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Rahma Chaabouni, Florian Strub, Florent Altché, Eu-
gene Tarassov, Corentin Tallec, Elnaz Davoodi,
Kory Wallace Mathewson, Olivier Tieleman, An-
geliki Lazaridou, and Bilal Piot. 2022. Emergent
communication at scale. In International Conference
on Learning Representations.
Emily Cheng, Mathieu Rita, and Thierry Poibeau. 2023.
On the correspondence between compositionality and
imitation in emergent neural communication. In
Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: ACL 2023 , pages 12432–12447, Toronto,
Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merriënboer, Caglar Gul-
cehre, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Fethi Bougares, Holger
Schwenk, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Learning
phrase representations using RNN encoder–decoder
for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings
of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1724–
1734, Doha, Qatar. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Henry Conklin and Kenny Smith. 2023. Compositional-
ity with variation reliably emerges in neural networks.
In The Eleventh International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations.
Colin Conwell, Jacob S. Prince, Kendrick N. Kay,
George A. Alvarez, and Talia Konkle. 2023. What
can 1.8 billion regressions tell us about the pressures
shaping high-level visual representation in brains and
machines? bioRxiv.
Gautier Dagan, Dieuwke Hupkes, and Elia Bruni. 2021.
Co-evolution of language and agents in referential
games. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the
European Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Main Volume, pages 2993–3004,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Bart de Boer. 2006. Computer modeling as a tool for
understanding language evolution. In Nathalie Gon-
tier, Jean Paul Van Bendegem, and Diederik Aerts,
editors, Evolutionary Epistemology, Language and
Culture, pages 381–406. Springer, Dordrecht.
Roberto Dessi, Eugene Kharitonov, and Baroni Marco.
2021. Interpretable agent communication from
scratch (with a generic visual processor emerging
on the side). In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, volume 34, pages 26937–26949.
Curran Associates, Inc.
Anuj Diwan, Layne Berry, Eunsol Choi, David Harwath,
and Kyle Mahowald. 2022. Why is winoground
hard? investigating failures in visuolinguistic compo-
sitionality. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 2236–2250, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Lukas Galke, Yoav Ram, and Limor Raviv. 2022. Emer-
gent communication for understanding human lan-
guage evolution: What’s missing? In Emergent
Communication Workshop at ICLR 2022.
66

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
Lukas Galke and Limor Raviv. 2024. Emergent commu-
nication and learning pressures in language models:
a language evolution perspective. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.14427.
Shangmin Guo, Yi Ren, Serhii Havrylov, Stella Frank,
Ivan Titov, and Kenny Smith. 2019. The emergence
of compositional languages for numeric concepts
through iterated learning in neural agents.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian
Sun. 2016. Deep residual learning for image recog-
nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
pages 770–778.
Charles F Hockett. 1959. Animal" languages" and hu-
man language. Human Biology, 31(1):32–39.
Cheng-Yu Hsieh, Jieyu Zhang, Zixian Ma, Aniruddha
Kembhavi, and Ranjay Krishna. 2023. Sugarcrepe:
Fixing hackable benchmarks for vision-language
compositionality. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, volume 36, pages 31096–31116.
Curran Associates, Inc.
Amita Kamath, Jack Hessel, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2023.
What’s “up” with vision-language models? investi-
gating their struggle with spatial reasoning. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing , pages 9161–
9175, Singapore. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Eugene Kharitonov, Rahma Chaabouni, Diane Boucha-
court, and Marco Baroni. 2020. Entropy minimiza-
tion in emergent languages. In Proceedings of the
37th International Conference on Machine Learning,
volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research, pages 5220–5230. PMLR.
Eugene Kharitonov, Roberto Dessì, Rahma Chaabouni,
Diane Bouchacourt, and Marco Baroni. 2021.
EGG: a toolkit for research on Emergence of
lanGuage in Games. https://github.com/
facebookresearch/EGG.
Simon Kirby, Hannah Cornish, and Kenny Smith. 2008.
Cumulative cultural evolution in the laboratory: An
experimental approach to the origins of structure
in human language. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 105(31):10681–10686.
Simon Kirby, Tom Griffiths, and Kenny Smith. 2014.
Iterated learning and the evolution of language.
Simon Kirby, Monica Tamariz, Hannah Cornish, and
Kenny Smith. 2015. Compression and communica-
tion in the cultural evolution of linguistic structure.
Cognition, 141:87–102.
Satwik Kottur, José Moura, Stefan Lee, and Dhruv Batra.
2017. Natural language does not emerge ‘naturally’
in multi-agent dialog. In Proceedings of the 2017
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 2962–2967, Copenhagen,
Denmark. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Tom Kouwenhoven, Tessa Verhoef, Roy de Kleijn, and
Stephan Raaijmakers. 2022. Emerging Grounded
Shared V ocabularies Between Human and Machine,
Inspired by Human Language Evolution. Frontiers
in Artificial Intelligence, 5.
Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Marieke Mur, and Peter A Ban-
dettini. 2008. Representational similarity analysis-
connecting the branches of systems neuroscience.
Frontiers in systems neuroscience, 2:4.
Angeliki Lazaridou and Marco Baroni. 2020. Emergent
multi-agent communication in the deep learning era.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.02419.
Angeliki Lazaridou, Karl Moritz Hermann, Karl Tuyls,
and Stephen Clark. 2018. Emergence of linguistic
communication from referential games with sym-
bolic and pixel input. In International Conference on
Learning Representations.
Angeliki Lazaridou, Alexander Peysakhovich, and
Marco Baroni. 2017. Multi-agent cooperation and
the emergence of (natural) language. 5th Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2017 - Conference Track Proceedings, pages
1–11.
David Lewis. 1969. Convention: A philosophical study.
Cambridge, MA.
Fushan Li and Michael Bowling. 2019. Ease-of-
teaching and language structure from emergent com-
munication. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc.
Yuchen Lian, Arianna Bisazza, and Tessa Verhoef. 2021.
The effect of efficient messaging and input variability
on neural-agent iterated language learning. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, pages 10121–
10129, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yuchen Lian, Arianna Bisazza, and Tessa Verhoef. 2023.
Communication Drives the Emergence of Language
Universals in Neural Agents: Evidence from the
Word-order/Case-marking Trade-off. Transactions
of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
11:1033–1047.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James
Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Dollár,
and C Lawrence Zitnick. 2014. Microsoft coco:
Common objects in context. In Computer Vision–
ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich,
Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014, Proceedings,
Part V 13, pages 740–755. Springer.
John Locke. 1847. An essay concerning human under-
standing, volume 114. Kay & Troutman.
67

=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
Ryan Lowe, Abhinav Gupta, Jakob Foerster, Douwe
Kiela, and Joelle Pineau. 2020. On the interaction be-
tween supervision and self-play in emergent commu-
nication. In International Conference on Learning
Representations.
Matéo Mahaut, Francesca Franzon, Roberto Dessì, and
Marco Baroni. 2024. Referential communication
in heterogeneous communities of pre-trained visual
deep networks.
Paul Michel, Mathieu Rita, Kory Wallace Mathewson,
Olivier Tieleman, and Angeliki Lazaridou. 2023. Re-
visiting populations in multi-agent communication.
In The Eleventh International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations.
V olodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi
Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim Harley,
David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. 2016. Asyn-
chronous methods for deep reinforcement learning.
In Proceedings of The 33rd International Conference
on Machine Learning, volume 48 of Proceedings of
Machine Learning Research, pages 1928–1937, New
York, New York, USA. PMLR.
Milton Llera Montero, Casimir JH Ludwig, Rui Ponte
Costa, Gaurav Malhotra, and Jeffrey Bowers. 2021.
The role of disentanglement in generalisation. In In-
ternational Conference on Learning Representations.
Jesse Mu and Noah Goodman. 2021. Emergent commu-
nication of generalizations. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pages
17994–18007. Curran Associates, Inc.
Lukas Muttenthaler, Jonas Dippel, Lorenz Linhardt,
Robert A. Vandermeulen, and Simon Kornblith. 2023.
Human alignment of neural network representations.
In The Eleventh International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations.
Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni,
Huy V . V o, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov,
Pierre Fernandez, Daniel HAZIZA, Francisco Massa,
Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Mido Assran, Nicolas Ballas,
Wojciech Galuba, Russell Howes, Po-Yao Huang,
Shang-Wen Li, Ishan Misra, Michael Rabbat, Vasu
Sharma, Gabriel Synnaeve, Hu Xu, Herve Jegou,
Julien Mairal, Patrick Labatut, Armand Joulin, and
Piotr Bojanowski. 2024. DINOv2: Learning robust
visual features without supervision. Transactions on
Machine Learning Research.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya
Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sas-
try, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark,
et al. 2021. Learning transferable visual models from
natural language supervision. In International confer-
ence on machine learning, pages 8748–8763. PMLR.
Limor Raviv, Antje Meyer, and Shiri Lev-Ari. 2019a.
Compositional structure can emerge without genera-
tional transmission. Cognition, 182:151–164.
Limor Raviv, Antje Meyer, and Shiri Lev-Ari. 2019b.
Larger communities create more systematic lan-
guages. Proceedings of the Royal Society B ,
286(1907):20191262.
Arijit Ray, Filip Radenovic, Abhimanyu Dubey, Bryan
Plummer, Ranjay Krishna, and Kate Saenko. 2023.
Cola: A benchmark for compositional text-to-image
retrieval. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems, volume 36, pages 46433–46445. Curran
Associates, Inc.
Yi Ren, Shangmin Guo, Matthieu Labeau, Shay B. Co-
hen, and Simon Kirby. 2020. Compositional lan-
guages emerge in a neural iterated learning model.
In International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions.
Mathieu Rita, Paul Michel, Rahma Chaabouni, Olivier
Pietquin, Emmanuel Dupoux, and Florian Strub.
2024. Language evolution with deep learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2403.11958.
Mathieu Rita, Corentin Tallec, Paul Michel, Jean-
Bastien Grill, Olivier Pietquin, Emmanuel Dupoux,
and Florian Strub. 2022. Emergent communication:
Generalization and overfitting in lewis games. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
volume 35, pages 1389–1404. Curran Associates,
Inc.
Reinhard Selten and Massimo Warglien. 2007. The
emergence of simple languages in an experimental
coordination game. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 104(18):7361–7366.
Kenny Smith. 2022. How Language Learning and Lan-
guage Use Create Linguistic Structure. Current Di-
rections in Psychological Science, 31(2):177–186.
Luc Steels and Martin Loetzsch. 2012. The Grounded
Naming Game. Experiments in cultural language
evolution, 3:41–59.
Shane Steinert-Threlkeld, Xuhui Zhou, Zeyu Liu, and
C. M. Downey. 2022. Emergent communication fine-
tuning (EC-FT) for pretrained language models. In
Emergent Communication Workshop at ICLR 2022.
Ilia Sucholutsky, Lukas Muttenthaler, Adrian Weller,
Andi Peng, Andreea Bobu, Been Kim, Bradley C.
Love, Erin Grant, Iris Groen, Jascha Achterberg,
Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Katherine M. Collins, Kather-
ine L. Hermann, Kerem Oktar, Klaus Greff, Mar-
tin N. Hebart, Nori Jacoby, Qiuyi Zhang, Raja Mar-
jieh, Robert Geirhos, Sherol Chen, Simon Kornblith,
Sunayana Rane, Talia Konkle, Thomas P. O’Connell,
Thomas Unterthiner, Andrew K. Lampinen, Klaus-
Robert Müller, Mariya Toneva, and Thomas L. Grif-
fiths. 2023. Getting aligned on representational align-
ment.
Tristan Thrush, Ryan Jiang, Max Bartolo, Amanpreet
Singh, Adina Williams, Douwe Kiela, and Candace
Ross. 2022. Winoground: Probing vision and lan-
guage models for visio-linguistic compositionality.
68

=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages
5238–5248.
Olivier Tieleman, Angeliki Lazaridou, Shibl Mourad,
Charles Blundell, and Doina Precup. 2019. Shap-
ing representations through communication: commu-
nity size effect in artificial learning systems. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1912.06208.
Ronald J Williams. 1992. Simple statistical gradient-
following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
learning. Machine learning, 8:229–256.
Zhenlin Xu, Marc Niethammer, and Colin A Raffel.
2022. Compositional generalization in unsupervised
compositional representation learning: A study on
disentanglement and emergent language. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
volume 35, pages 25074–25087. Curran Associates,
Inc.
Chenhao Zheng, Jieyu Zhang, Aniruddha Kembhavi,
and Ranjay Krishna. 2024. Iterated learning im-
proves compositionality in large vision-language
models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pages 13785–13795.
A Channel capacity
To test to what degree communicative success,
TOPSIM , and representational alignment are con-
founded with the communication channel capac-
ity, we ran simulations altering the vocabulary
size (V ={3, 5, 10, 20, 40, 50, 100}) and message
length (L ={2, 3, 5, 10, 50, 100}) resulting in 42
parameter settings per loss type.
Overall, performance is relatively independent
of the chosen configuration, but vocabulary size in-
fluences success more than message length (Figure
5). The hyperparameters that resulted in the best
validation accuracy (i.e., generalisation; Chaabouni
et al., 2022) for the standardce setup wereV = 40
andL = 2. These parameters are used to produce
the results in the main paper. Contra expectations,
the vocabulary size also influenced TOPSIM more
than message length. It, especially in the case of
ce +LRSA , is higher when messages are shorter
but have access to a larger vocabulary (Figure 6).
Figure 7 shows that, regardless of capacity, inter-
agent alignment ( RSA sl) increases while image-
agent alignment (RSA si and RSA li) decreases with
thece loss. Interestingly, RSA sl is agnostic to ca-
pacity but a larger vocabulary size, not message
length, reduces the degree of drifting away from
the input. We hypothesise this to result from lower
pressure to compress rich continuous embeddings
into smaller discrete vocabulary embeddings.
Figure 5: The validation accuracy as a dependent factor
of the vocabulary size and maximum message length.
Values are averages across 15 seeds.
Figure 6: TOPSIM as a dependent factor of the vocab-
ulary size and maximum message length. Values are
averages across 15 seeds.
B Best hyperparameters
The parameters used to run the experiments in the
main paper were the following:
Parameter Value
Batch size 32
Optimiser Adam
Learning Rate (S & L) 0.01 & 0.001
V ocabulary size (V ) 40
Message length (L) 2
Hidden size (S & L) 768 & 768
Embedding size 50
Listener cosine temperature 0.1
Seeds
16,22,41,56,67,
77,14,78,99,23,
82,40,51,37,62
Table 1: Best-performing parameters resulting from the
parameter sweep.
C Interaction of the alignment term on
the cross-entropy loss
To ensure that there is no impact of the alignment
penalty on the pressure for communicative suc-
cess, we ablated the LRSA term of our proposed
69

=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
Figure 7: Representational alignment metrics averaged over 15 simulations with the standardce loss. Regardless of
channel capacity, representational alignment always occurs while losing relation to the input.
loss function and found that both, communicative
success and ce are not affected by the alignment
penalty (Figure 8). Corroborating that only thece
term provides pressure for successful communica-
tion (§5.4).
Figure 8: Learning curves (accuracy) and cross-entropy
loss (ce) for both loss settings. There is virtually no
effect of the auxiliary termLRSA on the cross entropy
loss or communicative success.
D Pre-trained vision modules
Although it is in principle possible to train the vi-
sion module of the agents from scratch (Dessi et al.,
2021), in our work, agents’ perception stems from a
pre-trained vision-language model. Although there
is reason to believe that DinoV2 embeddings cap-
ture high-level, conceptual image features useful
for discriminating image pairs (Oquab et al., 2024),
we assessed the degree to which the alignment prob-
lem occurs for different pre-trained models despite
encoding the same objects. We ran additional simu-
lations using image features obtained from ResNet
(He et al., 2016) and CLIP (Radford et al., 2021)
for 6 different parameter settings with thece loss
function. Here we used the parameters that resulted
in the best, worst, mean, and quantile validation
performance from the parameter sweep in appendix
A (see Table 2), and a sensible setup withV = 10
andL = 5.
Msg. Length (L) V ocab. Size ( V ) Vision
2 40
DinoV2
CLIP
ResNet
3 10
5 5
5 10
10 3
50 100
Table 2: The parameters for running additional simula-
tions with CLIP and ResNet to assess the robustness of
our results. Each combination was run for 15 different
seeds. Note: results for the DinoV2 simulations are
from the sweep.
Figure 9: Learning curves (accuracy) and RSA metrics
for different vision models averaged over 6 parameter
settings with 15 seeds each. The representational align-
ment problem always occurs. Line style corresponds
to the vision module used to obtain image embeddings
and colour indicates the metric. Areas indicate the 95%
confidence intervals.
Figure 9 shows clearly that inter-agent alignment
70

=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
increases while agent-image alignment decreases
for all models. In addition to the similar results
reported by Bouchacourt and Baroni (2018) for
VGG ConvNet embeddings, both 4096 and 1000
layers, we can confirm that the problem is agnostic
to the input embeddings. Interestingly, agent repre-
sentations drift most for CLIP embeddings. Never-
theless, the agents still develop a successful com-
munication strategy, indicating that out-of-the-box
CLIP embeddings are the least useful for agents in
finding a (non-grounded) solution. No such differ-
ences are seen when the agents are trained with the
additional alignment penalty term, inter-agent and
image-agent alignment remain high for all models.
71