=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
Learning Translations: Emergent Communication Pretraining
for Cooperative Language Acquisition
Dylan Cope and Peter McBurney
King’s College London
dylan.cope@kcl.ac.uk
Abstract
In Emergent Communication (EC) agents learn to
communicate with one another, but the protocols
that they develop are specialised to their training
community. This observation led to research into
Zero-Shot Coordination (ZSC) for learning com-
munication strategies that are robust to agents not
encountered during training. However, ZSC typi-
cally assumes that no prior data is available about
the agents that will be encountered in the zero-
shot setting. In many cases, this presents an un-
necessarily hard problem and rules out communi-
cation via preestablished conventions. We propose
a novel AI challenge called a Cooperative Lan-
guage Acquisition Problem (CLAP) in which the
ZSC assumptions are relaxed by allowing a ‘joiner’
agent to learn from a dataset of interactions be-
tween agents in a target community. We propose
and compare two methods for solving CLAPs: Be-
haviour Cloning (BC), and Emergent Communica-
tion pretraining and Translation Learning(ECTL),
in which an agent is trained in self-play with EC
and then learns to translate between an emergent
protocol and the target community’s protocol.
1 Introduction
Creating teams of artificial agents that can communicate and
cooperate has been a long-standing area of interest in multi-
agent systems research. Advances in multi-agent reinforce-
ment learning have enabled researchers in the field of Emer-
gent Communication (EC) to train such teams in ever more
complex domains [Wagner et al., 2003; Foerster et al., 2016;
Sukhbaatar et al., 2016; Lazaridou and Baroni, 2020]. These
agents are typically trained by allowing discrete messages to
be exchanged between agents. Programmers do not assign
meaning to the messages, rather, meaning emerges via the
training process as communicative conventions are developed
in service of solving the task. As such, the mapping between
meanings and messages is arbitrary, and any permutation of
a learned protocol is equally likely to appear across differ-
ent training runs [Bullard et al., 2021]. The result is that the
learned conventions established within a training community
will be very unlikely to work with new agents, and by default,
the EC-trained agents will be incapable of adapting.
In response to this, many researchers have become in-
terested in devising methods in which agents learn com-
municative strategies that can adapt to this Zero-Shot Co-
ordination (ZSC) setting [Li et al., 2023; Hu et al., 2021;
Hu et al., 2020; Ossenkopf, 2020; Cope and Schoots, 2020;
Bullard et al., 2020 ]. ZSC algorithms typically aim to suc-
cessfully communicate with an unknown agent on the first
encounter, without any prior information. But in many real-
world settings, this is an unnecessarily challenging assump-
tion. If someone is injured on a street in London, passing
pedestrians can form an ad hoc team and aid the patient by
speaking to each other in English to coordinate a response.
Indeed, language is arguably the most critical set of conven-
tions that such teams can draw upon to effectively work to-
gether.
The study of artificial agents that can form ad hoc teams is
known asAd Hoc Teamwork(AHT) [Stone et al., 2010]. Sim-
ilarly to ZSC, most of these algorithms aim to make as few
assumptions as possible about the players that an agent may
form a team with. Notably, [Sarratt and Jhala, 2015] applied
this minimalist approach to communication. Other work has
relaxed this by assuming a prior known communication pro-
tocol [Barrett et al., 2014; Mirsky et al., 2020].
In this work, we present a novel AI challenge that we call
a Cooperative Language Acquisition Problem (CLAP). Here
by ‘language acquisition’ we mean learning the syntax and
semantics of a preexisting communication system used by a
community. This class of problems is positioned between
the challenges of ZSC and AHT. In a CLAP, we are given
a dataset of communication events between speakers and lis-
teners in a target community as they solve a problem. Our
goal is to construct a joiner agent that can communicate and
cooperate with agents from this community. This problem is
also closely related to Imitation Learning (IL), however, most
work in IL is confined to the single agent setting [Hussein et
al., 2017]. So to the best of our knowledge, this is the first at-
tempt to pose an IL problem for multi-agent communication
within a formal cooperative model.
Alongside defining CLAP, we outline two baseline solu-
tions to this problem. The first uses a simple imitation learn-
ing method. The second is a novel algorithm called Emer-
gent Communication pretraining and Translation Learning
Proceedings of the Thirty-Third International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-24)
40

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
(ECTL). We introduce two environments and train target
communities of agents that cooperate via a learned communi-
cation protocol. Data is then gathered from these communi-
ties and then used to train joiner agents with ECTL and the be-
haviour cloning (BC) algorithm[Sammut, 2010]. We demon-
strate that ECTL is more robust than BC to expert demonstra-
tions that give an incomplete picture of the underlying prob-
lem and that ECTL is significantly more effective than BC
when communications data is limited. Finally, we apply these
methods to user-generated data and show that ECTL can learn
to communicate with a human to cooperatively solve a task.
2 Background
2.1 Decentralised POMDPs
A Decentralised Partially-Observable Markov De-
cision Process (Dec-POMDP) is a formal model
of a cooperative environment defined as a tuple
M = ( S, A, T, r, Ω, O) [Oliehoek and Amato, 2016 ],
where S is a set of states, and A = Q
i Ai is a product
of individual agent action sets. A joint action a ∈ A is a
tuple of actions from each agent that is used to compute the
environment’s transition dynamics, defined by a probability
distribution over states T : S × A × S → [0, 1]. Team
performance is defined by a cooperative reward function
r : S × A × S over state transitions and joint actions.
Ω = {Ωi} is a set of observation sets, and O : S → Q
i Ωi is
an observation function.
Each agent i follows a policy πi that maps an observation
sequence (or a single observation if i is memoryless) to a
distribution over its actions. A trajectory for an agent i is
a sequence of observation-action-reward tuples τi ∈ T i =
(Ωi × A i × R)∗. For a set of policies Π = {πi}, a joint
trajectory is τ ∈ T = ( Ω × A × R)∗, and we can denote
the distribution of joint trajectories for this set of policies act-
ing in the environment as M|Π. In this work, we will only
consider finite-horizon Dec-POMDPs, so the lengths of tra-
jectories will always be bounded. The total reward for this
trajectory is the sum of rewards along the sequence, denoted
R(τ ). The expected sum of rewards for a set of policies will
be denoted R(Π) = Eτ ∼M|Π [R(τ )].
2.2 Emergent Communication
Emergent communication is the study of agents that learn
(or evolve) to make use of communication channels without
previously established semantics. In a typical set-up, each
agent’s action set in the Dec-POMDP can be expressed as
Ai = Ae
i × Ac
i, where Ac
i is a set of communicative actions,
and Ae
i is a set of environment actions. The communicative
actions can further be written as the product of one-way com-
munication channels from i to j ∈ Ci using a discrete mes-
sage alphabet Σ, i.e. Ac
i = Σ |Ci|. These are cheap-talk chan-
nels, meaning there is no cost to communication. This variant
of a Dec-POMDP is known as a Dec-POMDP-Comm [Gold-
man and Zilberstein, 2004; Goldman and Zilberstein, 2008;
Oliehoek and Amato, 2016]. The messages have no prior se-
mantics as the transition function of the Dec-POMDP only
depends on the environment actions Ae
i , and agents are not
programmed to send messages with any prescribed meaning.
Rather, the semantics emerge through training. For this paper,
we will consider memoryless agents that communicate within
a centralised forward pass computing a joint action for the en-
vironment (similar to [Goldman and Zilberstein, 2003]).
Policy Factorisation. We suppose that we can factor
a memoryless communication agent’s policy πi into an
environment-level policy πe
i : Ω i × Σns → A e
i , where ns
is the number of agents that send messages to agent i, and
a communication policy πc
i : Ω i → A c
i. Therefore, given a
joint observation o = (o1, . . . , oN ) ∈ Q
i Ωi, the joint policy
π(o) is computed by first producing the outgoing messages
M i
out = πc
i (oi) from each sender agent i to each receiver
agent j ∈ Ci. A set of incoming messages M i
in is then con-
structed for each agenti by passing the messages fori through
a communication channel function σi : Ac
i → Σ. The final
environment actions are then given by ai = πe
i (oi, M i
in).
Self-play. Emergent communication training is often done
in self-play, where parameters are shared between agents
and centrally optimised [Tesauro, 1994; Hu et al., 2020 ].
Communication can be hard to learn with Reinforcement
Learning (RL) as sending messages cannot provide reward
unless listeners already know how to use the information.
This chicken-and-egg problem can be solved with centralised
training by allowing gradients to backpropagate through com-
munication channels. A Gumbel-Softmax [Jang et al., 2017;
Maddison et al., 2017] function is a popular choice as it facil-
itates backpropagation during training and can be discretised
during evaluation.
As [Lowe et al., 2019] have shown, measuring whether or
not agents trained to communicate are doing so can be tricky
for complex environments. To remedy this, they introduced
definitions of positive listening and positive signalling. In
short, to be positive listening/signalling; the listening agent
should change its actions according to the messages it re-
ceives and the signalling agent should change its messages
depending on what it observes.
2.3 Imitation Learning
Imitation Learning (IL) is a form of machine learning in
which expert demonstration data is used to construct a policy
for solving a task. The data is typically in the form of an ob-
servation o and action a, and the imitation learning problem is
posed as supervised classification learning[Ross and Bagnell,
2010; Rajaraman et al., 2020], e.g. optimising θ to minimise
the difference between a and ˆa = πθ(o). See [Hussein et al.,
2017] for a comprehensive review of these methods.
3 Cooperative Language Acquisition
In this section, we introduce our definition of a Coopera-
tive Language Acquisition Problem (CLAP). A CLAP can
be formulated from the simplest case involving a preexist-
ing target community of two agents, denoted Π = {A, B},
that achieve some non-trivial performance in a Dec-POMDP-
Com M. Consider an interaction at time t in which A is
speaking and B is listening. While making the observation
os
t , the speaker emits a message mt. Then, while observing
or
t and mt, the receiver takes the actionai in the environment.
We are given access to M and a dataset of such interactions,
Proceedings of the Thirty-Third International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-24)
41

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
(a) Joint agents architecture (two agents)
with communication.
(b) Illustration of the
gridworld environment (Section 5.1).
(c) Illustration of the
driving environment (Section 5.1).
Figure 1: (a) Agents architecture diagram for two agents (top and bottom) with communication. (b) Illustration of the gridworld toy envi-
ronment with two agents, depicted with blue and green circles on a 5x5 grid. The green and blue stars indicate the locations of each agent’s
respective goals. The cloud thought bubble depicts the world as the green agent observes it. Note, each agent does not see their own goal, and
they are off-by-one square in their knowledge of each other’s goal. (c) Illustration of the driving environment with two agents. The dark circle
in the centre is the ‘pit’; the region in which large negative penalties are given when agents enter. The stars indicate goal locations, which can
spawn in one of eight locations (the unused locations indicated by the greyed-out stars). The continuous state space is indicated with the grid
axes. The agents are represented by arrowheads indicating their current position and direction. Again, here agents do not observe their own
goals and therefore need to communicate, but unlike the gridworld, they do have perfect knowledge of the other agent’s goals.
denoted (os
t , mt, or
t , ar
t ) ∈ D , and our task is to construct a
joiner agent J . In this paper, we focus on a specific case
of the task in which we aim to replace a target agent in Π
(so there is always a fixed number of players), which we call
CLAP-Replace. The agent J should be able to take on the
role of a target agent (e.g. either A or B) and successfully
communicate with the other, while also acting in the envi-
ronment to maximise the cooperative reward. The joiner will
be evaluated zero-shot, i.e. on the first joining event, so all
learning must be done beforehand.
The emphasis of the dataset is on learning the communi-
cation protocol as this is assumed to be the key aspect of the
community’s strategy that cannot be learned independently
from observing their behaviour. As the communication sym-
bols have no prior semantics, any protocol could be equally
successful if the same meanings were assigned to a different
permutation of the symbols. On the other hand, there may
be many ‘environment-level’ behaviours that can be learned
without needing to know the specific strategies of a given
community. We will discuss disentangling these factors in
Section 3.2.
3.1 Problem Definitions
The cooperative language acquisition task is to construct a
joining agent J that learns from observing a target commu-
nity Π. When J replaces an agent in Π, we have a CLAP-
Replace task:
Problem 1 (CLAP-Replace). Suppose there exists a Dec-
POMDP-Com M and a set of policies Π = {πi} trained
in M. Given a target policy πk ∈ Π to replace, a dataset Dk
of interactions (os
t , mt, or
t , ar
t ) in which πk is either a speaker
or listener, the task is to construct a policy πJ such that:
πJ ∈ arg max
π′
R({π′} ∪ Π−k) (1)
Where Π−k = Π \ {πk}. In other words, maximise the team
rewards when the joiner replaces k.
This can be decomposed into three related problems; afor-
ward communication (signalling), a backward communica-
tion (listening), and acting. More precisely, J needs to learn
to send messages that maximise the expected sum of rewards
for listening agents and interpret messages to maximise the
rewards of its trajectory. But the agent also needs to learn
to utilise information, both communicated and observed, for
selecting actions.
If we were allowed to interact with the target commu-
nity Π before evaluation, we could apply standard reinforce-
ment learning tools. However, we are interested in settings
in which disrupting the community and jeopardising perfor-
mance to learn is not acceptable, so J needs to perform well
on the first actual joining episode.
3.2 Disentangling Environment-Level and
Communicative Competencies
We assume that teams of agents can achieve a certain level of
performance in the environment by two categories of compe-
tencies: (1) ‘environment-level’ skills, and (2) communica-
tion strategies that rely on established conventions. The key
distinction we aim for is that the former should be learnable
independently of observing a target community’s behaviour.
We start by defining that the team achieves an average to-
tal reward of R when acting together in the environment and
communicating.
Measuring the communicative competency (1) is relatively
easy: if communication is blocked and the team achieves a
lower average total reward R′ < R, and by assuming that the
agents are engaged in positive listening and signalling, we can
attribute this drop in performance to a lack of communication.
We evaluate the influence of environment-level compe-
tencies (2) by similarly hampering them, and investigating
whether this leads to a drop in performance. We will as-
sume that each agent’s observation can be partitioned into
‘private’ (or ‘local’) and shared (or ‘global’) components:
oi
t = ( li
t, gt), where gt is observed by both speakers and
listeners, but li
t is private to i. To assess the contribution
Proceedings of the Thirty-Third International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-24)
42

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
of environment-level skills we restrict the environment-level
policy by removing private information, o′
t = ( 0, gt), and
replacing each πi with π′
i(ot, Mt) = ( πe
i (o′
t, Mt), πc
i (ot)).
We can then attribute a change R′′ < R to the agent being
prevented from exercising environment-level skills. To un-
derstand this intervention, consider the following points:
1. We hamper environment-level skills by blocking private
information from πe, but an agent must still be allowed
to receive messages as this may provide vital infor-
mation for succeeding based on communication skills.
Thus, πc for the speaker must not be intervened with.
2. Communication may rely on shared information, so re-
moving the context by blocking this information may in-
terfere with measuring environment-level skills.
3. Information private to a recipient cannot have been used
by the speaker to create the messages, so if a drop in per-
formance is seen when it is removed from πe, this can
only be due to a loss in the recipient’s capacity to use
that private information to contribute to the team’s per-
formance through its actions (as opposed to its contri-
butions through sending messages). Recall, we are only
obfuscating this information from πe; πc still sees it.
4. If no drop from blocking private information to πe is ob-
served, it implies either: (a) all of an agent’s contribution
to the collective performance is the result of following
direct orders from a speaker. Or, (b) an agent’s contribu-
tion is entirely contingent on global information.
Note that following 4b, the absence of a drop does not im-
ply that the team does not possess environment-level compe-
tencies, but the presence of a drop does.
4 Methods for Constructing Joiners
In this section, we introduce two methods for constructing
joiners for the CLAP-Replace task. The first applies a stan-
dard imitation learning algorithm, and the second pretrains
agents using emergent communication and then translates the
learned communication protocol to the target community’s
protocol. Each method is decomposed into forward and back-
ward problems, posed as supervised learning tasks.
4.1 Behaviour Cloning (BC)
In the setup for CLAP-Replace we are given a dataset
(os
t , mt, or
t , ar
t ) ∈ D k of speaker and listener observations,
messages, and actions taken by the receiver. The simplest
imitation learning baseline solution is to independently apply
the behaviour cloning algorithm [Widrow and Smith, 1964;
Michie et al., 1990; Sammut, 2010] to the signalling and lis-
tening problems. The dataset is partitioned into two datasets:
a signalling dataset (os
t , mt) ∈ D s
k where k is the speaker
and a listening dataset ((or
t , mt), ar
t ) ∈ D r
k where k is the
receiver. These datasets are structured as input-label tuples
to learn communicative and environmental-level policy fac-
tors (πc
il and πe
il) of the overall imitation policyπil. These are
learned with a categorical cross-entropy (CCE) loss between
predicted and actual labels. In Figure 2, πc
il and πe
il are com-
posed of encoder and communication/action heads, with the
same architecture as in Figure 1a.
4.2 Emergent Communcation Pretraining and
Translation Learning (ECTL)
A well-known issue with imitation learning agents is that they
can be brittle given the natural biases in the expert demonstra-
tion data [Kumar et al., 2022 ]. Especially in more complex
domains, experts typically stay in the regions of state space in
which they get high rewards, which may only be a small por-
tion of the possibilities. If a BC agent makes a mistake when
attempting the task itself, it may enter into unseen territory.
Thus errors can compound as the agent has not learned what
to do and makes more mistakes, leading to degraded team
performance in a multi-agent cooperative setting.
This leads to the idea that the joiner could explore the state
space of M before joining Π, and thereby become a more re-
liable cooperator. In general, pretraining may allow the agent
to learn environment-level skills that could be transferable to
cooperating with any new team. To this end, we propose the
method Emergent Communication pretraining and Transla-
tion Learning (ECTL). The first step of ECTL is to (pre)train
a set of agents Π′ from scratch in M that we refer to as the
EC training community, where for each agent in Π there is a
corresponding agent in Π′.
The agents in Π′ are composed of three components, il-
lustrated in Figure 1a: an observation encoder encθ, a com-
munications head πc
θ, and an action head πe
θ, parameterised
by θ, and shared amongst the policies Π′. For brevity and to
be consistent with the notation in previous sections we will
omit the encoder from our notation, and write πc
θ(o) instead
of πc
θ(encθ(o)). This training process could use any viable
multi-agent reinforcement learning algorithm, and which is
most suitable depends on the properties of the underlying en-
vironment and the number of agents. In Section 5.2, we will
outline the specific methods we used for our experiments.
Agents in the EC training community learn to cooperate via
an emergent communication protocol over their message al-
phabet Σ′. The next step in ECTL towards building the joiner
agent for Π is to translate this protocol to the one used by
the target community. For a CLAP-Replace task with target
agent πk ∈ Π, we select the equivalent pretrained π′
k ∈ Π′ to
use a starting point for translation learning. We will refer to
π′
k as the EC pretrained agent.
Once again, the target community data Dk is transformed
into a signalling dataset (os
t , mt) ∈ D s
k and a listening dataset
((or
t , mt), m′
t) ∈ D r
k. Note that the ECTL signalling dataset
is identical to the signalling dataset used for imitation learn-
ing, but the listening dataset is different. Instead of the label
being an action, it is a message from the pretrained message
space Σ′. To construct these labels, we use the speaker’s ob-
servation from Dk and compute the message that pretrained
agent would have emitted in that situation, i.e. m′
t = πc
θ(os
t ).
From these data, we learn translation functions for sig-
nalling and for listening. A separate translation function can
be learned for each communication channel if there are mul-
tiple possible senders and/or receivers for the target agent, or
two models (one for each CLAP sub-problem) can be used
by providing the sender/receiver identifiers as input. For our
experiments, we will use the latter approach. However, for
simplicity in the following descriptions of how these func-
Proceedings of the Thirty-Third International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-24)
43

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
Legend
Label
Pred
Input
ECTL Backward
Trainable
ECTL Forward BC Forward BC Backward
Figure 2: Training architecture diagrams for theBehaviour Cloning (BC) and Emergent Communication pretraining and Translation Learning
(ECTL) methods. The forward and backward problems for each method are solved with supervised learning. Circles are variables and
trapezoids are functions. Dotted lines indicate that gradients are blocked from backpropagating along a path. For the ECTL diagrams the
enc and πc functions are learned during the emergent communication pretraining phase. The variables os
t , or
t , mt, at are the sender/receiver
agent observations, the sender’s message, and the receiver’s action from the dataset of interactions collected from the target community.
−30 −20 −10 0
Mean Total Reward
No Modiﬁcations (R(Π))
No Communications
No Shared Obs for πe
No Private Obs for πe
Untrained Agents
(a) Ablated agents in the target community.
−8 −6 −4 −2 0
Mean Total Reward
R(Π)
ECTL
ECTL (Biased Data)
BC
BC (Biased Data) (b) Mean reward for different teams.
Figure 3: Performance results from cases in which (a) the team is formed of a variety of agents, comparing ECTL to behaviour cloning (BC)
with unbiased and biased data from the gridworld environment. And (b) the target community agents ablated in different ways. All results
are from 500 evaluation episodes and the error bars show means within 95% confidence intervals.
tions are trained, we will assume one sender and receiver for
the target agent and omit agent identifiers. Furthermore, the
training architectures for the translation functions are illus-
trated by the two diagrams to the left of Figure 2.
A signalling translation function τ s
ϕ : Ω k × Σ′ → Σ, pa-
rameterised by ϕ, maps the communication protocol of the
EC training community to the target community protocol.
Given an observation os
t ∈ Ωk and a message mt ∈ Σ from
Ds
k, we can compute the message m′
t = Σ ′ that the agent
π′
k ∈ Π′ would send in that situation. The translation func-
tion is trained to predict the demonstrator agent’s message:
ϕ∗ ∈ arg min
ϕ
X
(os
t ,mt)∈Ds
k
CCE (mt, ˆmt) (2)
where ˆmt = τ s
ϕ(os
t , m′
t), m ′
t = πc
θ(os
t ) (3)
A listening translation functionτ r
ψ : Ω k×Σ → Σ′ maps the
target community’s communication protocol to the EC train-
ing community’s protocol and is parameterised by ψ. Note
that, in general, τ r and τ s need not be inverses of one an-
other, as two agents can use arbitrarily different protocols in
each direction.
To train τ r
ψ, we use the message that was received by
the listener (the target agent) mt, the listener’s observation
or
t , and the speaker’s observation or
t . The translation func-
tion takes the observation and the message and produces a
new message in the EC training community’s message space:
τ r
ψ(or
t , mt) = ˆm′
t ∈ Σ′. To get the ground-truth label for this
prediction, we find the message that the EC pretrained agent
would have sent in the target community speaker’s situation.
The result is the following optimisation criterion:
ψ∗ ∈ arg min
ψ
X
((or
t ,mt),m′
t)∈Dr
k
CCE (m′
t, ˆm′
t) (4)
where ˆm′
t = τ r
ψ(or
t , mt), m ′
t = πc
θ(os
t ) (5)
Finally, we can put together these pieces into a final trans-
lator joiner agent Jectl composed of the following communi-
cation and environment-level policy factors:
πc
ectl = τ s
ϕ ◦ πc
θ and πe
ectl(o, m) = πe
θ(o, τ r
ψ(m)) (6)
So when the joiner agent receives a message, it uses the listen-
ing translation function to predict the message that it would
have received from the equivalent agent in its EC training
community. When speaking, the agent first computes the
message that it would have sent in its original message space,
and then passes that through the signalling translation func-
tion before finally sending it.
Proceedings of the Thirty-Third International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-24)
44

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
10 25 50 100 250 500 1000
Data Collection Episodes (log10 scale)
600
800
1000Mean Episode Reward
BC
ECTL
R(Π)
(a) The mean CLAP-Replace performance on the Driving Game
(No Pit) for ECTL and BC, against the number data collection
episodes (Ncollect) from the target community.
No Pit Pit No Pit Pit0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Normalised Mean Reward
ECTL BC
Ncollect / Pit
1000 / False
500 / False
100 / False
1000 / True
500 / True
100 / True
(b) Mean reward for each method normalised by the original
team mean rewards. Shows the impact of the pit on CLAP per-
formance, highlighting BC’s relative fragility.
Figure 4: Comparisons between BC and ECTL on the Driving Communication environment.
5 Experiments
5.1 Environments
In order to empirically investigate BC and ECTL for solving
CLAP-Replace tasks, we created two environments. Firstly,
a simple gridworld toy environment in whichN agents coop-
erate by communicating goal information. Secondly, a ‘driv-
ing’ communication problem in which agents must navigate a
continuous space to reach a goal, while potentially avoiding a
pit in their way. Again, the goal location is known by another
agent so they need to communicate to solve the problem.
Goal Communications Gridworld. Each agent has a goal
square in the grid that they need to reach that changes each
episode. No agent observes its own goal unless it is within
one tile of it, but at all times it observes a ‘close guess’ (a
location within one tile) of the goal of another of the agents
in the game. The environment is illustrated in Figure 1b.
Goal Communications Driving Game. As discussed in
Section 4.2, BC agents can be brittle when regions of the state
space are not present in the demonstration data. To investi-
gate this problem, we introduced this ‘driving’ environment
in which the agent steers and accelerates a body in a con-
tinuous grid (Figure 1c). This environment has two settings
defined by the presence or absence of a circular region in the
centre of the world where a large penalty is applied for every
agent within the region. The agents must navigate to one of
eight fixed goal locations, known by their partner and selected
at random for each episode.
5.2 Creating Target Communities
Target communities Π of three agents in the gridworld
environment and two agents in the driving environment
were trained using Multi-Agent Proximal Policy Optimisa-
tion (MAPPO) [Yu et al., 2022 ]. For the policy networks
we used the architecture in Figure 1a with parameter shar-
ing between agents. The value network used a concatena-
tion of all of the agents’ observations as input, meaning that
we rely on centralisation for training. The value network
did not share any parameters with the policy networks. A
Gumbel-Softmax [Jang et al., 2017; Maddison et al., 2017 ]
communication channel function was used on communica-
tion channels. Further training details and hyperparameters
can be found in the project’s GitHub repository1.
5.3 Ablating Target Community Agents
The gridworld environment was designed such that the agents
need to use a combination of communicative and individual
skills in order to succeed. To demonstrate how these skills
contribute to the performance, we evaluate ablated versions
of the agents with the interventions discussed in Section 3.2.
Figure 3a shows the results of these experiments. At the top,
we show the original unmodified performance for reference
(R(Π)). The next two bars, appearing roughly equal in size
and variance, correspond to blocking communications (bar 2)
and ‘global’/‘shared’ information fromπe (bar 3).
5.4 Gridworld CLAP-Replace
We train ECTL and BC agents after collecting interaction
datasets from Ncollect = 100 episodes of Π acting in the envi-
ronment. Figure 3b shows the results from forming teams of
different compositions in the gridworld environment. We see
that ECTL and BC solve the CLAP-Replace task by achieving
the equivalent team performance as the original team (R(Π)).
Both methods have roughly the same performance, which
is due to the fact that there are no opportunities for errors
to compound. The BC agent will have learned the experts’
behaviour from any state as the agent starting positions and
goal positions are sampled from a uniform distribution over
all grid tiles. Therefore, if a BC agent makes a mistake in
any given position, it will have seen during training how to
recover in the next position. So to investigate the effects of
unseen states we bias the training data by only including cases
where the target agent was in one of the first two columns of
the grid. The results are also shown in Figure 3b, and we see
that while ECTL maintains its performance, BC significantly
degrades.
1https://github.com/DylanCope/learning-translations
Proceedings of the Thirty-Third International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-24)
45

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
−5 0 5
X-Coordinate
−7.5
−5.0
−2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
Y-Coordinate
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
(a)
−5 0 5
X-Coordinate
−7.5
−5.0
−2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
Y-Coordinate
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
 (b)
 (c)
ECTL Random BC0
50
100
150Episode length (d)
Figure 5: (a,b) Two-dimensional histograms visualising how much time the agents spend in the different regions of the environment before
reaching their goals. Left and right show agents trained with/without pit penalties. The radius of the pit is indicated with the dashed circle
outline. We can see that when the pit is present agents avoid that region. The goal locations are also visible as we are not plotting positions
after the goals are reached. (c) The UI for the human to play the game as a listener. The top-left of the screen shows messages from the other
player. (d) The mean episode lengths when we played this game with different agents. The goal is for us to navigate to our goal location as
quickly as possible (one of the grey stars) using the messages. We see that only the ECTL agent was able to effectively communicate.
5.5 Driving Game CLAP-Replace
Moving on from the gridworld environment, we then per-
formed a series of experiments in the driving game. First, we
trained four teams on the environment, with two agents per
training team. Two of the teams with the pit, and the other
two without the pit. Figures 5a and 5b visualise where in the
environment these agents spend their time (before reaching
their goals), illustrating how the expert demonstrations may
not cover the pit region of state space.
In Figure 4a we see the effect of the number of data col-
lection episodes on the driving game CLAP-Replace perfor-
mance without the pit. We find that the ECTL performance
starts notably better than BC, and can do well with very lit-
tle data. However, as more data is gathered, eventually BC
scales better than ECTL. Yet, Figure 4b complicates this pic-
ture. Here we see the normalised reward comparisons be-
tween ECTL and BC showing the effect of the pit on perfor-
mance. The pit does not have much impact on ECTL, but the
performance of BC drops by a large margin, even for the case
with 1000 data collection episodes – the setting in which BC
outperforms ECTL when the pit is not present.
5.6 Translating to an Interpretable
Communication Protocol
After demonstrating that BC and ECTL could successfully
solve CLAPs for target communities of artificial agents, we
investigated whether or not the same methods could apply to
data generated by humans. We developed an interactive UI
through which a user could simultaneously control two agents
in the driving game while observing the entire game state (i.e.
both agent’s goals). This was then used to collect data from
70 episodes. Each row of data comprised the actions that the
user took for each agent and the agent-specific observations.
In its raw form, this data cannot be used to train CLAP agents
as it lacks messages. To remedy this we augmented the data
by constructing messages on the principle that each agent was
following direct instructions from the other, so each agent i’s
action ai
t became agent j’s messagemt = ai
t to agent i.
With this data, ECTL and BC agents could now be trained
in the same manner as done for the MAPPO target communi-
ties. However, due to the lack of a well-defined target com-
munity, the agents could not be evaluated in the same way. So
instead, we focused on specifically evaluating the signalling
capabilities of these agents with another UI that allows a user
to view their agent, the possible goal locations, and a mes-
sage from one of the artificial agents (Figure 5c). As the mes-
sage space is the action space for the user, it is inherently
interpretable and could be rendered to the user as one of the
strings ‘Accelerate’, ‘Turn Anti-Clockwise’, or ‘Turn Clock-
wise’. We then set up the UI to randomly switch the messen-
ger agent each episode from a pool of agents comprised of
an ECTL agent, a BC agent, and an agent that sends a ran-
dom message. Thus the user was always unaware of which
agent they were playing with. Figure 5d shows the results of
this experiment, measured by the mean number of timesteps
that it took for the user to reach the goal location while using
the messages. It shows that only the ECTL agent was able
to effectively communicate with the user, with the BC agent
conveying the same lack of information as the random policy.
6 Conclusions
In this paper, we have posed a new problem for multi-agent
communication learning, namely the Cooperative Language
Acquisition Problem (CLAP). Positioned relative to Zero-
Shot Coordination and Ad Hoc Teamwork, the CLAP chal-
lenge is to build an agent that learns the communication strat-
egy of a target community via observational data. But can
also leverage general ‘environment-level skills’ that transfer
to any ad hoc team. We have proposed two approaches to this
problem: Behaviour Cloning (BC) and Emergent Communi-
cation pretraining and Translation Learning (ECTL).
We have shown that ECTL can perform well in data-scarce
scenarios, including learning to communicate with a human
user. Additionally, it can effectively compensate for biased
expert demonstrations. On the other hand, while BC is brittle,
it may scale to large datasets. Further work should investigate
the potential for combining the strengths of these methods.
Finally, we have only explored CLAPs with a small number
of agents and complete, noise-free demonstration data. Fu-
ture investigations should relax these assumptions.
Proceedings of the Thirty-Third International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-24)
46

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
Acknowledgements
Dylan Cope is supported by the UKRI Centre for Doc-
toral Training in Safe and Trusted AI (EPSRC Project
EP/S023356/1). Thank you to Nandi Schoots, Alex Jackson
and Agathe Dorra for helping to proof read and refine ideas.
Thank you to Cassidy Laidlaw for implementation tips and
help with compute infrastructure.
References
[Barrett et al., 2014] Samuel Barrett, Noa Agmon, Noam
Hazon, Sarit Kraus, and Peter Stone. Communicating
with unknown teammates. In Proceedings of the 2014 in-
ternational conference on Autonomous agents and multi-
agent systems, AAMAS ’14, pages 1433–1434, Richland,
SC, May 2014. International Foundation for Autonomous
Agents and Multiagent Systems.
[Bullard et al., 2020] Kalesha Bullard, Franziska Meier,
Douwe Kiela, Joelle Pineau, and Jakob Foerster.
Exploring Zero-Shot Emergent Communication in
Embodied Multi-Agent Populations, December 2020.
arXiv:2010.15896 [cs].
[Bullard et al., 2021] Kalesha Bullard, Douwe Kiela,
Franziska Meier, Joelle Pineau, and Jakob Foerster.
Quasi-Equivalence Discovery for Zero-Shot Emergent
Communication, June 2021. arXiv:2103.08067 [cs].
[Cope and Schoots, 2020] Dylan Cope and Nandi Schoots.
Learning to Communicate with Strangers via Channel
Randomisation Methods. In The Emergent Communica-
tion Workshop at NeurIPS, Vancouver, Canada, 2020.
[Foerster et al., 2016] Jakob Foerster, Ioannis Alexandros
Assael, Nando de Freitas, and Shimon Whiteson. Learn-
ing to Communicate with Deep Multi-Agent Reinforce-
ment Learning. In D. D. Lee and M. Sugiyama and U. V .
Luxburg and I. Guyon and R. Garnett, editor, Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 29, pages 2137–
2145. Curran Associates, Inc., 2016.
[Goldman and Zilberstein, 2003] Claudia V . Goldman and
Shlomo Zilberstein. Optimizing information exchange in
cooperative multi-agent systems. In Proceedings of the
2nd International Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents
and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS 03), AAMAS ’03, pages
137–144, New York, NY , USA, July 2003. Association for
Computing Machinery.
[Goldman and Zilberstein, 2004] Claudia V . Goldman and
Shlomo Zilberstein. Decentralized control of cooper-
ative systems: categorization and complexity analysis.
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 22(1):143–174,
November 2004.
[Goldman and Zilberstein, 2008] Claudia V . Goldman and
Shlomo Zilberstein. Communication-Based Decomposi-
tion Mechanisms for Decentralized MDPs. Journal of
Artificial Intelligence Research, 32:169–202, May 2008.
arXiv:1111.0065 [cs].
[Hu et al., 2020] Hengyuan Hu, Adam Lerer, Alex
Peysakhovich, and Jakob Foerster. “Other-Play” for
Zero-Shot Coordination. In Proceedings of the 37th
International Conference on Machine Learning, pages
4399–4410. PMLR, November 2020. ISSN: 2640-3498.
[Hu et al., 2021] Hengyuan Hu, Adam Lerer, Brandon Cui,
David Wu, Luis Pineda, Noam Brown, and Jakob Foer-
ster. Off-Belief Learning. In Proceedings of the 38th In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR 139,
March 2021. arXiv: 2103.04000.
[Hussein et al., 2017] Ahmed Hussein, Mohamed Medhat
Gaber, Eyad Elyan, and Chrisina Jayne. Imitation Learn-
ing: A Survey of Learning Methods. ACM Computing
Surveys, 50(2):21:1–21:35, April 2017.
[Jang et al., 2017] Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole.
Categorical Reparameterization with Gumbel-Softmax. In
5th International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR 17), Palais des Congr `es Neptune, Toulon, France,
2017.
[Kumar et al., 2022] Aviral Kumar, Joey Hong, Anikait
Singh, and Sergey Levine. Should I Run Offline Rein-
forcement Learning or Behavioral Cloning? In Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations (ICLR 22), 2022.
[Lazaridou and Baroni, 2020] Angeliki Lazaridou and
Marco Baroni. Emergent Multi-Agent Communication in
the Deep Learning Era, July 2020. arXiv:2006.02419 [cs].
[Li et al., 2023] Yang Li, Shao Zhang, Jichen Sun, Yali Du,
Ying Wen, Xinbing Wang, and Wei Pan. Cooperative
Open-ended Learning Framework for Zero-Shot Coordi-
nation. In Proceedings of the 40th International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, pages 20470–20484. PMLR,
July 2023. ISSN: 2640-3498.
[Lowe et al., 2019] Ryan Lowe, Jakob Foerster, Y-Lan
Boureau, Joelle Pineau, and Yann Dauphin. On the Pit-
falls of Measuring Emergent Communication. In The 18th
International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Mul-
tiagent Systems (AAMAS), 2019.
[Maddison et al., 2017] Chris J. Maddison, Andriy Mnih,
and Yee Whye Teh. The Concrete Distribution: A Con-
tinuous Relaxation of Discrete Random Variables. In
5th International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR 17), Palais des Congr `es Neptune, Toulon, France,
2017.
[Michie et al., 1990] D Michie, M Bain, and J Mayes-
Michie. Cognitive models from subcognitive skills.
Knowledge-based Systems for Industrial Control, pages
71–99, January 1990.
[Mirsky et al., 2020] Reuth Mirsky, William Macke, Andy
Wang, Harel Yedidsion, and Peter Stone. A Penny for
Your Thoughts: The Value of Communication in Ad Hoc
Teamwork. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages
254–260, Yokohama, Japan, July 2020.
[Oliehoek and Amato, 2016] Frans A. Oliehoek and Christo-
pher Amato. A Concise Introduction to Decentralized
POMDPs. Springer International Publishing, 2016.
Proceedings of the Thirty-Third International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-24)
47

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
[Ossenkopf, 2020] Marie Ossenkopf. CoMaze: A cooper-
ative game for zero-shot coordination. In The Emergent
Communication Workshop at NeurIPS, 2020.
[Rajaraman et al., 2020] Nived Rajaraman, Lin Yang,
Jiantao Jiao, and Kannan Ramchandran. Toward the
Fundamental Limits of Imitation Learning. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33,
pages 2914–2924. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.
[Ross and Bagnell, 2010] Stephane Ross and Drew Bagnell.
Efficient Reductions for Imitation Learning. In Proceed-
ings of the Thirteenth International Conference on Arti-
ficial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 661–668. JMLR
Workshop and Conference Proceedings, March 2010.
ISSN: 1938-7228.
[Sammut, 2010] Caude Sammut. Behavioral Cloning. In
Claude Sammut and Geoffrey I. Webb, editors, Encyclo-
pedia of Machine Learning, pages 93–97. Springer US,
Boston, MA, 2010.
[Sarratt and Jhala, 2015] Trevor Sarratt and Arnav Jhala.
The Role of Models and Communication in the Ad Hoc
Multiagent Team Decision Problem. In Proceedings of the
Third Annual Conference on Advances in Cognitive Sys-
tems. Cognitive Systems Foundation, 2015.
[Stone et al., 2010] Peter Stone, Gal A Kaminka, Sarit
Kraus, and Jeffrey S Rosenschein. Ad Hoc Autonomous
Agent Teams: Collaboration without Pre-Coordination. In
Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Ar-
tificial Intelligence, 2010.
[Sukhbaatar et al., 2016] Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Arthur
Szlam, and Rob Fergus. Learning multiagent communi-
cation with backpropagation. In Proceedings of the 30th
International Conference on Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, pages 2252–2260. Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2016.
[Tesauro, 1994] Gerald Tesauro. TD-Gammon, a Self-
Teaching Backgammon Program, Achieves Master-Level
Play. Neural Computation, 6(2):215–219, 1994.
[Wagner et al., 2003] Kyle Wagner, James A. Reggia, Juan
Uriagereka, and Gerald S. Wilkinson. Progress in the
Simulation of Emergent Communication and Language.
Adaptive Behavior, 11(1):37–69, March 2003. Publisher:
SAGE Publications Ltd STM.
[Widrow and Smith, 1964] Bernard Widrow and Fred W
Smith. Pattern recognising control systems. Computer
and information sciences, 1964.
[Yu et al., 2022] Chao Yu, Akash Velu, Eugene Vinitsky, Ji-
axuan Gao, Yu Wang, Alexandre Bayen, and Yi Wu. The
Surprising Effectiveness of PPO in Cooperative Multi-
Agent Games. In 36th Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets
and Benchmarks., New Orleans, USA, 2022.
Proceedings of the Thirty-Third International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-24)
48