On the Pitfalls of Measuring Emergent Communication
Ryan
Lowe
MILA & Facebook AI Research
Montreal, QC
ryan.lowe@cs.mcgill.ca
Jakob Foerster
Facebook AI Research
Menlo Park, CA
Y-Lan Boureau
Facebook AI Research
New York, NY
Joelle Pineau
MILA & Facebook AI Research
Montreal, QC
Yann Dauphin
Google AI
Accra, Ghana
ABSTRACT
How do we know if communication is emerging in a multi-agent
system? The vast majority of recent papers on emergent commu-
nication show that adding a communication channel leads to an
increase in reward or task success. This is a useful indicator, but
provides only a coarse measure of the agent’s learned communica-
tion abilities. As we move towards more complex environments, it
becomes imperative to have a set of iner tools that allow qualitative
and quantitative insights into the emergence of communication.
This may be especially useful to allow humans to monitor agents’
behaviour, whether for fault detection, assessing performance, or
even building trust. In this paper, we examine a few intuitive ex-
isting metrics for measuring communication, and show that they
can be misleading. Speciically, by training deep reinforcement
learning agents to play simple matrix games augmented with a
communication channel, we ind a scenario where agents appear
to communicate (their messages provide information about their
subsequent action), and yet the messages do not impact the envi-
ronment or other agent in any way. We explain this phenomenon
using ablation studies and by visualizing the representations of the
learned policies. We also survey some commonly used metrics for
measuring emergent communication, and provide recommenda-
tions as to when these metrics should be used.
KEYWORDS
Deep learning; Learning agent capabilities; Multi-agent learning
ACM Reference Format:
Ryan Lowe, Jakob Foerster, Y-Lan Boureau, Joelle Pineau, and Yann Dauphin.
2019. On the Pitfalls of Measuring Emergent Communication. In Proc. of the
18th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems
(AAMAS 2019), Montreal, Canada, May 13ś17, 2019, IFAAMAS, 9 pages.
1 INTRODUCTION
Communication through language is one of the hallmarks of human
intelligence; it allows us to share information eiciently between
humans and coordinate on shared tasks. This is a strong motivation
to develop machines that can communicate, so that they can share
their knowledge with us and help us coordinate on tasks where
humans alone perform poorly. One of the approaches for developing
agents capable of language is through emergent communication. The
Proc. of the 18th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems
(AAMAS 2019), N. Agmon, M. E. Taylor, E. Elkind, M. Veloso (eds.), May 13ś17, 2019,
Montreal, Canada. © 2019 International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and
Multiagent Systems (www.ifaamas.org). All rights reserved.
idea is to use an environment consisting of randomly initialized
agents and a dedicated communication channel, which the agents
can learn to use to accomplish tasks that require coordination.
This approach is motivated by a utilitarian view of communication,
where language is viewed as one of many tools an agent can use
towards achieving its goals, and an agent ‘understands’ language
once it can use it to accomplish these goals [ 14, 42]. The question
of emergent communication is also of scientiic interest, as it could
provide insights into the origins of human language [30].
Recently, there has been a signiicant revival of emergent commu-
nication research using methods from deep reinforcement learning
(deep RL). In this line of work, researchers deine a multi-agent
environment where agents possess a (usually discrete and costless)
communication channel, and train the agents’ policies (represented
by deep neural networks) to maximize the cumulative reward. In
most cases, the multi-agent environment is a cooperative referential
game, where one agent (the ‘speaker’) has some private information
about a public observation, and must communicate it accurately to
the other agent (the ‘listener’) [ 6, 8, 10, 17, 21ś23]. In other works,
agents navigate a simulated world with a limited ield of view, and
communication can help the agents coordinate to achieve a com-
mon goal [ 3, 12, 20, 36]. Algorithmic development has led to emer-
gent communication in games with pixel-based inputs [ 3, 6, 22],
in settings incorporating human language [ 23, 25], and even in
more complex games that require inferring the belief state of the
opponent, like Hanabi [12].
Despite these advances, there has been no formal study eval-
uating how we measure emergent communication. Most papers
in this area show that adding a communication channel helps the
agents achieve a higher reward, and attempt to understand the
communication protocols qualitatively by, for example, plotting the
distribution over messages in various states of the environment.
This is a reasonable approach: if adding a communication channel
increases the reward in an environment, then the agents are making
some use of that channel. But it is useful to quantify more inely
the degree of communication as it can provide more insights into
agent behaviour. This may be essential for human monitoring; we
want to understand why agents are making certain decisions, and
understanding their language would make this signiicantly easier.
Our aim is to develop a set of evaluation tools for detecting and
measuring emergent communication that increases the robustness
of emergent communication research on the way to developing
agents that communicate with humans.
Session 3A: Learning and Adaptation
AAMAS 2019, May 13-17, 2019, Montréal, Canada
693