=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
Social Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation
for Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning
Natasha Jaques 1 2 Angeliki Lazaridou 2 Edward Hughes 2 Caglar Gulcehre 2 Pedro A. Ortega2 DJ Strouse 3
Joel Z. Leibo2 Nando de Freitas2
Abstract
We propose a uniﬁed mechanism for achieving
coordination and communication in Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning (MARL), through
rewarding agents for having causal inﬂuence
over other agents’ actions. Causal inﬂuence is
assessed using counterfactual reasoning. At each
timestep, an agent simulates alternate actions that
it could have taken, and computes their effect on
the behavior of other agents. Actions that lead to
bigger changes in other agents’ behavior are con-
sidered inﬂuential and are rewarded. We show that
this is equivalent to rewarding agents for having
high mutual information between their actions.
Empirical results demonstrate that inﬂuence leads
to enhanced coordination and communication
in challenging social dilemma environments,
dramatically increasing the learning curves of the
deep RL agents, and leading to more meaningful
learned communication protocols. The inﬂuence
rewards for all agents can be computed in a
decentralized way by enabling agents to learn a
model of other agents using deep neural networks.
In contrast, key previous works on emergent
communication in the MARL setting were unable
to learn diverse policies in a decentralized manner
and had to resort to centralized training. Conse-
quently, the inﬂuence reward opens up a window
of new opportunities for research in this area.
1. Introduction
Intrinsic Motivation for Reinforcement Learning (RL) refers
to reward functions that allow agents to learn useful behavior
1Media Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
USA 2Google DeepMind, London, UK 3Institute for Advanced
Study, Princeton University, Princeton, USA. Correspondence to:
Natasha Jaques <jaquesn@mit.edu>, Angeliki Lazaridou<ange-
liki@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).
across a variety of tasks and environments, sometimes in
the absence of environmental reward (Singh et al., 2004).
Previous approaches to intrinsic motivation often focus on
curiosity (e.g. Pathak et al. (2017); Schmidhuber (2010)),
or empowerment (e.g. Klyubin et al. (2005); Mohamed &
Rezende (2015)). Here, we consider the problem of deriving
intrinsic social motivation from other agents in multi-agent
RL (MARL). Social learning is incredibly important for
humans, and has been linked to our ability to achieve
unprecedented progress and coordination on a massive scale
(Henrich, 2015; Harari, 2014; Laland, 2017; van Schaik &
Burkart, 2011; Herrmann et al., 2007). While some previous
work has investigated intrinsic social motivation for RL (e.g.
Sequeira et al. (2011); Hughes et al. (2018); Peysakhovich &
Lerer (2018)), these approaches rely on hand-crafted rewards
speciﬁc to the environment, or allowing agents to view the
rewards obtained by other agents. Such assumptions make it
impossible to achieve independent training of MARL agents
across multiple environments.
Achieving coordination among agents in MARL still remains
a difﬁcult problem. Prior work in this domain (e.g., Foerster
et al. (2017; 2016)), often resorts to centralized training to
ensure that agents learn to coordinate. While communication
among agents could help with coordination, training emer-
gent communication protocols also remains a challenging
problem; recent empirical results underscore the difﬁculty
of learning meaningful emergent communication protocols,
even when relying on centralized training (e.g., Lazaridou
et al. (2018); Cao et al. (2018); Foerster et al. (2016)).
We propose a uniﬁed method for achieving both coordination
and communication in MARL by giving agents an intrinsic
reward for having a causal inﬂuence on other agents’ actions.
Causal inﬂuence is assessed using counterfactual reasoning;
at each timestep, an agent simulates alternate, counterfactual
actions that it could have taken, and assesses their effect
on another agent’s behavior. Actions that lead to relatively
higher change in the other agent’s behavior are considered
to be highly inﬂuential and are rewarded. We show how
this reward is related to maximizing the mutual information
between agents’ actions, and hypothesize that this inductive
bias will drive agents to learn coordinated behavior. Maximiz-

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
Social Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL
ing mutual information as a form of intrinsic motivation has
been studied in the literature on empowerment (e.g. Klyubin
et al. (2005); Mohamed & Rezende (2015)). Social inﬂuence
can be seen as a novel, social form of empowerment.
To study our inﬂuence reward, we adopt the Sequential So-
cial Dilemma (SSD) multi-agent environments of Leibo et al.
(2017). Through a series of three experiments, we show that
the proposed social inﬂuence reward allows agents to learn to
coordinate and communicate more effectively in these SSDs.
We train recurrent neural network policies directly from pix-
els, and show in the ﬁrst experiment that deep RL agents
trained with the proposed social inﬂuence reward learn ef-
fectively and attain higher collective reward than powerful
baseline deep RL agents, which often completely fail to learn.
In the second experiment, the inﬂuence reward is used to di-
rectly train agents to use an explicit communication channel.
We demonstrate that the communication protocols trained
with the inﬂuence reward are more meaningful and effective
for obtaining better collective outcomes. Further, we ﬁnd
a signiﬁcant correlation between being inﬂuenced through
communication messages and obtaining higher individual re-
ward, suggesting that inﬂuential communication is beneﬁcial
to the agents that receive it. By examining the learning curves
in this second experiment, we again ﬁnd that the inﬂuence
reward is essential to allow agents to learn to coordinate.
Finally, we show that inﬂuence agents can be trained
independently, when each agent is equipped with an internal
neural network Model of Other Agents (MOA), which has
been trained to predict the actions of every other agent. The
agent can then simulate counterfactual actions and use its
own internal MOA to predict how these will affect other
agents, thereby computing its own intrinsic inﬂuence reward.
Inﬂuence agents can thus learn socially, only through
observing other agents’ actions, and without requiring a
centralized controller or access to another agent’s reward
function. Therefore, the inﬂuence reward offers us a simple,
general and effective way of overcoming long-standing
unrealistic assumptions and limitations in this ﬁeld of
research, including centralized training and the sharing of
reward functions or policy parameters. Moreover, both
the inﬂuence rewards as well as the agents’ policies can be
learned directly from pixels using expressive deep recurrent
neural networks. In this third experiment, the learning curves
once again show that the inﬂuence reward is essential for
learning to coordinate in these complex domains.
The paper is structured as follows. We describe the envi-
ronments in Section 2, and the MARL setting in Section 3.
Section 4 introduces the basic formulation of the inﬂuence
reward, Section 5 extends it with the inclusion of explicit
communication protocols, and Section 6 advances it by
including models of other agents to achieve independent
training. Each of these three sections presents experiments
and results that empirically demonstrate the efﬁcacy of
the social inﬂuence reward. Related work is presented in
Section 7. Finally, more details about the causal inference
procedure are given in Section 8.
2. Sequential Social Dilemmas
Sequential Social Dilemmas (SSDs) (Leibo et al., 2017)
are partially observable, spatially and temporally extended
multi-agent games with a game-theoretic payoff structure.
An individual agent can obtain higher reward in the
short-term by engaging in defecting, non-cooperative
behavior (and thus is greedily motivated to defect), but the
total payoff per agent will be higher if all agents cooperate.
Thus, the collective reward obtained by a group of agents
in these SSDs gives a clear signal about how well the agents
learned to cooperate (Hughes et al., 2018).
We experiment with two SSDs, a public goods gameCleanup,
and a public pool resource game Harvest. In both games
apples (green tiles) provide the rewards, but are a limited
resource. Agents must coordinate harvesting apples with the
behavior of other agents in order to achieve cooperation (for
further details see Section 2 of the Supplementary Material).
Tthe code for these games is available in open-source.1
As the Schelling diagrams in Figure 2 of the Supplementary
Material reveal, all agents would beneﬁt from learning to
cooperate in these games, because even agents that are being
exploited get higher reward than in the regime where more
agents defect. However, traditional RL agents struggle to
learn to coordinate or cooperate to solve these tasks effec-
tively (Hughes et al., 2018). Thus, these SSDs represent chal-
lenging benchmark tasks for the social inﬂuence reward. Not
only must inﬂuence agents learn to coordinate their behavior
to obtain high reward, they must also learn to cooperate.
3. Multi-Agent RL for SSDs
We consider a MARL Markov game deﬁned by the tuple
⟨S,T,A,r⟩, in which multiple agents are trained to indepen-
dently maximize their own individual reward; agents do
not share weights. The environment state is given bys∈S.
At each timestept, each agentk chooses an actionak
t∈A.
The actions of all N agents are combined to form a joint
action at = [a0
t,...aN
t ], which produces a transition in the
environmentT (st+1|at,st), according to the state transition
distributionT . Each agent then receives its own reward
rk(at,st), which may depend on the actions of other agents.
A history of these variables over time is termed a trajectory,
τ ={st,at,rt}T
t=0. We consider a partially observable
setting in which the kth agent can only view a portion of
1https://github.com/eugenevinitsky/
sequential_social_dilemma_games

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
Social Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL
the true state, sk
t . Each agent seeks to maximize its own
total expected discounted future reward,Rk =∑∞
i=0γirk
t+i,
whereγ is the discount factor. A distributed asynchronous
advantage actor-critic (A3C) approach (Mnih et al., 2016)
is used to train each agent’s policyπk.
Our neural networks consist of a convolutional layer, fully
connected layers, a Long Short Term Memory (LSTM)
recurrent layer (Gers et al., 1999), and linear layers. All
networks take images as input and output both the policyπk
and the value functionVπk (s), but some network variants
consume additional inputs and output either communication
policies or models of other agents’ behavior. We will refer to
the internal LSTM state of thekth agent at timestept asuk
t .
4. Basic Social Inﬂuence
Social inﬂuence intrinsic motivation gives an agent addi-
tional reward for having a causal inﬂuence on another agent’s
actions. Speciﬁcally, it modiﬁes an agent’s immediate reward
so that it becomesrk
t =αek
t +βck
t , whereek
t is the extrinsic or
environmental reward, andck
t is the causal inﬂuence reward.
To compute the causal inﬂuence of one agent on another,
suppose there are two agents, k andj, and that agent j is
able to condition its policy on agentk’s action at timet,ak
t .
Thus, agent j computes the probability of its next action
asp(aj
t|ak
t,sj
t ). We can then intervene on ak
t by replacing
it with a counterfactual action, ˜ak
t . This counterfactual
action is used to compute a new distribution overj’s next
action,p(aj
t|˜ak
t,sj
t ). Essentially, agentk asks a retrospective
question: “How would j’s action change if I had acted
differently in this situation?”.
By sampling several counterfactual actions, and av-
eraging the resulting policy distribution of j in
each case, we obtain the marginal policy of j,
p(aj
t|sj
t ) = ∑
˜ak
t
p(aj
t|˜ak
t,sj
t )p(˜ak
t|sj
t ) —in other words,
j’s policy if it did not consider agent k. The discrepancy
between the marginal policy ofj and the conditional policy
ofj givenk’s action is a measure of the causal inﬂuence
ofk onj; it gives the degree to whichj changes its planned
action distribution because ofk’s action. Thus, the causal
inﬂuence reward for agentk is:
ck
t =
N∑
j=0,j̸=k
[
DKL [p(aj
t|ak
t,sj
t )

∑
˜ak
t
p(aj
t| ˜ak
t,sj
t )p(˜ak
t|sj
t )]
]
=
N∑
j=0,j̸=k
[
DKL [p(aj
t|ak
t,sj
t )
p(aj
t|sj
t )]
]
. (1)
Note that it is possible to use a divergence metric other than
KL; we have found empirically that the inﬂuence reward is
robust to the choice of metric.
The reward in Eq. 1 is related to the mutual information (MI)
between the actions of agentsk andj,I(ak;aj|s). As the
reward is computed over many trajectories sampled inde-
pendently from the environment, we obtain a Monte-Carlo
estimate ofI(ak;aj|s). In expectation, the inﬂuence reward
incentivizes agents to maximize the mutual information
between their actions. The proof is given in Section 1 of
the Supplementary Material. Intuitively, training agents
to maximize the MI between their actions results in more
coordinated behavior.
Moreover, the variance of policy gradient updates increases
as the number of agents in the environment grows (Lowe et al.,
2017). This issue can hinder convergence to equilibrium for
large-scale MARL tasks. Social inﬂuence can reduce the
variance of policy gradients by introducing explicit depen-
dencies across the actions of each agent. This is because the
conditional variance of the gradients an agent is receiving
will be less than or equal to the marginalized variance.
Note that for the basic inﬂuence model we make two assump-
tions: 1) we use centralized training to computeck
t directly
from the policy of agentj, and 2) we assume that inﬂuence is
unidirectional: agents trained with the inﬂuence reward can
only inﬂuence agents that are not trained with the inﬂuence
reward (the sets of inﬂuencers and inﬂuencees are disjoint,
and the number of inﬂuencers is in [1,N−1]). Both of these
assumptions are relaxed in later sections. Further details, as
well as further explanation of the causal inference procedure
(including causal diagrams) are available in Section 8.
4.1. Experiment I: Basic Inﬂuence
Figure 1 shows the results of testing agents trained with the
basic inﬂuence reward against standard A3C agents, and an
ablated version of the model in which agents do not receive
the inﬂuence reward, but are able to condition their policy
on the actions of other agents (even when the other agents
are not within the agent’s partially observed view of the
environment). We term this ablated model thevisible actions
baseline. In this and all other results ﬁgures, we measure
the total collective reward obtained using the best hyper-
parameter setting tested with 5 random seeds each. Error
bars show a 99.5% conﬁdence interval (CI) over the random
seeds, computed within a sliding window of 200 agent steps.
We use a curriculum learning approach which gradually
increases the weight of the social inﬂuence reward overC
steps (C∈ [0.2−3.5]×108); this sometimes leads to a slight
delay before the inﬂuence models’ performance improves.
As is evident in Figures 1a and 1b, introducing an awareness
of other agents’ actions helps, but having the social inﬂuence
reward eventually leads to signiﬁcantly higher collective
reward in both games. Due to the structure of the SSD games,
we can infer that agents that obtain higher collective reward
learned to cooperate more effectively. In theHarvest MARL
setting, it is clear that the inﬂuence reward is essential to

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
Social Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL
achieve any reasonable learning.
(a) Cleanup
 (b) Harvest
Figure 1: Total collective reward obtained in Experiment 1.
Agents trained with inﬂuence (red) signiﬁcantly outperform
the baseline and ablated agents. In Harvest, the inﬂuence
reward is essential to achieve any meaningful learning.
To understand how social inﬂuence helps agents achieve
cooperative behavior, we investigated the trajectories
produced by high scoring models in both Cleanup and
Harvest; the analysis revealed interesting behavior.
As an example, in the Cleanup video available here:
https://youtu.be/iH_V5WKQxmo a single agent
(shown in purple) was trained with the social inﬂuence
reward. Unlike the other agents, which continue to move
and explore randomly while waiting for apples to spawn,
the inﬂuencer only traverses the map when it is pursuing an
apple, then stops. The rest of the time it stays still.
Figure 2: A moment
of high inﬂuence when
the purple inﬂuencer sig-
nals the presence of
an apple (green tiles)
outside the yellow in-
ﬂuencee’s ﬁeld-of-view
(yellow outlined box).
Figure 2 shows a moment of
high inﬂuence between the in-
ﬂuencer and the yellow inﬂu-
encee. The inﬂuencer has cho-
sen to move towards an ap-
ple that is outside of the ego-
centric ﬁeld-of-view of the yel-
low agent. Because the inﬂu-
encer only moves when apples
are available, this signals to the
yellow agent that an apple must
be present above it which it
cannot see. This changes the
yellow agent’s distribution over
its planned action,p(aj
t|ak
t,sj
t ),
and allows the purple agent to
gain inﬂuence. A similar mo-
ment occurs when the inﬂu-
encer signals to an agent that has
been cleaning the river that no
apples have appeared by staying
still (see Figure 6 in the Supplementary Material).
In this case study, the inﬂuencer agent learned to use its own
actions as a binary code which signals the presence or absence
of apples in the environment. We observe a similar effect in
Harvest. This type of action-based communication could be
likened to the bee waggle dance discovered by von Frisch
(1969). Evidently, the inﬂuence reward gave rise not only to
cooperative behavior, but to emergent communication.
It is important to consider the limitations of the inﬂuence
reward. Whether it will always give rise to cooperative be-
havior may depend on the speciﬁcs of the environment and
task, and tuning the trade-off between environmental and
inﬂuence reward. Although inﬂuence is arguably necessary
for coordination (e.g. two agents coordinating to manipulate
an object must have a high degree of inﬂuence between their
actions), it may be possible to inﬂuence another agent in a
non-cooperative way. The results provided here show that the
inﬂuence reward did lead to increased cooperation, in spite of
cooperation being difﬁcult to achieve in these environments.
5. Inﬂuential Communication
Given the above results, we next experiment with using the
inﬂuence reward to train agents to use an explicit communi-
cation channel. At each timestep, each agentk chooses a dis-
crete communication symbolmk
t ; these symbols are concate-
nated into a combined message vectormt = [m0
t,m1
t...mN
t ],
forN agents. This message vector mt is then given as input
to every other agent in the next timestep. Note that previous
work has shown that self-interested agents do not learn to use
this type of ungrounded, cheap talk communication chan-
nel effectively (Crawford & Sobel, 1982; Cao et al., 2018;
Foerster et al., 2016; Lazaridou et al., 2018).
Figure 3: The communication model has two heads, which
learn the environment policy,πe, and a policy for emitting
communication symbols,πm. Other agents’ communication
messages mt−1 are input to the LSTM.
To train the agents to communicate, we augment our initial
network with an additional A3C output head, that learns a
communication policyπm and value functionVm to deter-
mine which symbol to emit (see Figure 3). The normal policy
and value function used for acting in the environment,πe and
Ve, are trained only with environmental rewarde. We use
the inﬂuence reward as an additional incentive for training
the communication policy,πm, such thatr =αe+βc. Coun-
terfactuals are employed to assess how much inﬂuence an
agent’s communication message from the previous timestep,
mk
t−1, has on another agent’s action,aj
t, where:
ck
t =
N∑
j=0,j̸=k
[
DKL [p(aj
t|mk
t−1,sj
t )
p(aj
t|sj
t )]
]
(2)

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
Social Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL
Importantly, rewarding inﬂuence through a communication
channel does not suffer from the limitation mentioned in the
previous section, i.e. that it may be possible to inﬂuence
another agent in a non-cooperative way. We can see this
for two reasons. First, there is nothing that compels agent
j to act based on agentk’s communication message; ifmk
t
does not contain valuable information,j is free to ignore it.
Second, becausej’s action policyπe is trained only with en-
vironmental reward,j will only change its intended action as
a result of observingmk
t (i.e. be inﬂuenced by mk
t ) if it con-
tains information that helpsj to obtain environmental reward.
Therefore, we hypothesize that inﬂuential communication
must provide useful information to the listener.
5.1. Experiment II: Inﬂuential Communication
Figure 4 shows the collective reward obtained when training
the agents to use an explicit communication channel. Here,
the ablated model has the same structure as in Figure 3, but
the communication policyπm is trained only with environ-
mental reward. We observe that the agents incentivized to
communicate via the social inﬂuence reward learn faster, and
achieve signiﬁcantly higher collective reward for the majority
of training in both games. In fact, in the case ofCleanup, we
found thatα = 0in the optimal hyperparameter setting, mean-
ing that it was most effective to train the communication head
with zero extrinsic reward (see Table 2 in the Supplementary
Material). This suggests that inﬂuence alone can be a suf-
ﬁcient mechanism for training an effective communication
policy. In Harvest, once again inﬂuence is critical to allow
agents to learn coordinated policies and attain high reward.
(a) Cleanup
 (b) Harvest
Figure 4: Total collective reward for deep RL agents with
communication channels. Once again, the inﬂuence reward
is essential to improve or achieve any learning.
To analyze the communication behaviour learned by the
agents, we introduce three metrics, partially inspired by
(Bogin et al., 2018). Speaker consistency, is a normalized
score∈ [0,1] which assesses the entropy ofp(ak|mk) and
p(mk|ak) to determine how consistently a speaker agent
emits a particular symbol when it takes a particular action,
and vice versa (the formula is given in the Supplementary Ma-
terial Section 4.4). We expect this measure to be high if, for
example, the speaker always emits the same symbol when it is
cleaning the river. We also introduce two measures ofinstan-
taneous coordination(IC), which are both measures of mu-
tual information (MI): (1) symbol/action IC=I(mk
t ;aj
t+1)
measures the MI between the inﬂuencer/speaker’s symbol
and the inﬂuencee/listener’s next action, and (2) action/action
IC =I(ak
t ;aj
t+1) measures the MI between the inﬂuencer’s
action and the inﬂuencee’s next action. To compute these
measures we ﬁrst average over all trajectory steps, then take
the maximum value between any two agents, to determine
if any pair of agents are coordinating. Note that these mea-
sures are allinstantaneous, as they consider only short-term
dependencies across two consecutive timesteps, and cannot
capture if an agent communicates inﬂuential compositional
messages, i.e. information that requires several consecutive
symbols to transmit and only then affects the other agents
behavior.
Figure 5: Metrics describing the quality of learned com-
munication protocols. The models trained with inﬂuence
reward exhibit more consistent communication and more
coordination, especially in moments where inﬂuence is high.
Figure 5 presents the results. The speaker consistencies
metric reveals that inﬂuence agents more unambiguously
communicate about their own actions than baseline agents,
indicating that the emergent communication is more mean-
ingful. The IC metrics demonstrate that baseline agents
show almost no signs of co-ordinating behavior with com-
munication, i.e. speakers saying A and listeners doing B
consistently. This result is aligned with both theoretical re-
sults in cheap-talk literature (Crawford & Sobel, 1982), and
recent empirical results in MARL (e.g. Foerster et al. (2016);
Lazaridou et al. (2018); Cao et al. (2018)).
In contrast, we do see high IC between inﬂuence agents,
but only when we limit the analysis to timesteps on which
inﬂuence was greater than or equal to the mean inﬂuence
(cf. inﬂuential moments in Figure 5). Inspecting the results
reveals a common pattern: inﬂuence is sparse in time. An
agent’s inﬂuence is only greater than its mean inﬂuence in
less than 10% of timesteps. Because the listener agent is
not compelled to listen to any given speaker, listeners se-
lectively listen to a speaker only when it is beneﬁcial, and
inﬂuence cannot occur all the time. Only when the listener
decides to change its action based on the speaker’s message
does inﬂuence occur, and in these moments we observe high
I(mk
t ;aj
t+1). It appears the inﬂuencers have learned a strat-
egy of communicating meaningful information about their
own actions, and gaining inﬂuence when this becomes rele-
vant enough for the listener to act on it.

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
Social Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL
Examining the relationship between the degree to which
agents were inﬂuenced by communication and the reward
they obtained gives a compelling result: agents that are the
most inﬂuenced also achieve higher individual environmental
reward. We sampled 100 different experimental conditions
(i.e., hyper-parameters and random seeds) for both games,
and normalized and correlated the inﬂuence and individual
rewards. We found that agents who are more often inﬂuenced
tend to achieve higher task reward in bothCleanup,ρ =.67,
p<0.001, and Harvest, ρ =.34, p<0.001. This supports
the hypothesis that in order to inﬂuence another agent via
communication, the communication message should contain
information that helps the listener maximize its own environ-
mental reward. Since better listeners/inﬂuencees are more
successful in terms of task reward, we have evidence that
useful information was transmitted to them.
This result is promising, but may depend on the speciﬁc ex-
perimental approach taken here, in which agents interact
with each other repeatedly. In this case, there is no advantage
to the speaker for communicating unreliable information
(i.e. lying), because it would lose inﬂuence with the listener
over time. This may not be guaranteed in one-shot interac-
tions. However, given repeated interactions, the above results
provide empirical evidence that social inﬂuence as intrinsic
motivation allows agents to learn meaningful communication
protocols when this is otherwise not possible.
6. Modeling Other Agents
Computing the causal inﬂuence reward as introduced in Sec-
tion 4 requires knowing the probability of another agent’s
action given a counterfactual, which we previously solved
by using a centralized training approach in which agents
could access other agents’ policy networks. While using a
centralized training framework is common in MARL (e.g.
Foerster et al. (2017; 2016)), it is less realistic than a scenario
in which each agent is trained independently. We can relax
this assumption and achieve independent training by equip-
ping each agent with its own internalModel of Other Agents
(MOA). The MOA consists of a second set of fully-connected
and LSTM layers connected to the agent’s convolutional layer
(see Figure 6), and is trained to predict all other agents’ next
actions given their previous actions, and the agent’s egocen-
tric view of the state:p(at+1|at,sk
t ). The MOA is trained
using observed action trajectories and cross-entropy loss.
A trained MOA can be used to compute the social inﬂuence
reward in the following way. Each agent can “imagine” coun-
terfactual actions that it could have taken at each timestep,
and use its internal MOA to predict the effect on other agents.
It can then give itself reward for taking actions that it esti-
mates were the most inﬂuential. This has an intuitive appeal,
because it resembles how humans reason about their effect
on others (Ferguson et al., 2010). We often ﬁnd ourselves
Figure 6: The Model of Other Agents (MOA) architecture
learns both an RL policy πe, and a supervised model that
predicts the actions of other agents, at+1. The supervised
model is used for internally computing the inﬂuence reward.
asking counterfactual questions of the form, “How would she
have acted if I had done something else in that situation?”,
which we answer using our internal model of others.
We only give the inﬂuence reward to an agent ( k) when
the agent it is attempting to inﬂuence (j) is within its ﬁeld-
of-view, because the estimates ofp(aj
t+1|ak
t,sk
t ) are more
accurate whenj is visible tok. This constraint could have the
side-effect of encouraging agents to stay in closer proximity.
However, an intrinsic social reward encouraging proximity
is reasonable given that humans seek afﬁliation and to spend
time near other people (Tomasello, 2009).
6.1. Experiment III: Modeling Other Agents
As before, we allow the policy LSTM of each agent to condi-
tion on the actions of other agents in the last timestep (actions
are visible). We compare against an ablated version of the
architecture shown in Figure 6, which does not use the output
of the MOA to compute a reward; rather, the MOA can be
thought of as an unsupervised auxiliary task that may help the
model to learn a better shared embedding layer, encouraging
it to encode information relevant to predicting other agents’
behavior. Figure 7 shows the collective reward obtained for
agents trained with a MOA module. While we see that the
auxiliary task does help to improve reward over the A3C base-
line, the inﬂuence agent gets consistently higher collective
reward. These results demonstrate that the inﬂuence reward
can be effectively computed using an internal MOA, and thus
agents can learn socially but independently, optimizing for a
social reward without a centralized controller.
Agents with inﬂuence achieve higher collective reward than
the previous state-of-the-art for these environments (275 for
Cleanup and 750 for Harvest) (Hughes et al., 2018). This is
compelling, given that previous work relied on the assump-
tion that agents could view one another’s rewards; we make
no such assumption, instead relying only on agents viewing
each other’s actions. Table 4 of the Supplementary Material

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
Social Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL
(a) Cleanup
 (b) Harvest
Figure 7: Total collective reward for MOA models. Again,
intrinsic inﬂuence consistently improves learning, with the
powerful A3C agent baselines not being able to learn.
gives the ﬁnal collective reward obtained in previous work,
and by each inﬂuence model for all three experiments.
7. Related work
Several attempts have been made to develop intrinsic social
rewards.2 Sequeira et al. (2011) developed hand-crafted re-
wards for a foraging environment, in which agents were pun-
ished for eating more than their fair share of food. Another
approach gave agents an emotional intrinsic reward based
on their perception of their neighbours’ cooperativeness in
a networked version of the iterated prisoner’s dilemma, but
is limited to scenarios in which it is possible to directly clas-
sify each action as cooperative or non-cooperative (Yu et al.,
2013). This is untenable in complex settings with long-term
strategies, such as the SSDs under investigation here.
Some approaches allow agents to view each others’ rewards
in order to optimize for collective reward. Peysakhovich &
Lerer (2018) show that if even a single agent is trained to op-
timize for others’ rewards, it can signiﬁcantly help the group.
Hughes et al. (2018) introduced an inequity aversion moti-
vation, which penalized agents if their rewards differed too
much from those of the group. Liu et al. (2014) train agents
to learn their own optimal reward function in a cooperative,
multi-agent setting with known group reward. However, the
assumption that agents can view and optimize for each oth-
ers’ rewards may be unrealistic. Thus, recent work explores
training agents that learn when to cooperate based solely on
their own past rewards (Peysakhovich & Lerer, 2017).
Training agents to learn emergent communication protocols
has been explored (Foerster et al., 2016; Cao et al., 2018; Choi
et al., 2018; Lazaridou et al., 2018; Bogin et al., 2018), with
many authors ﬁnding that selﬁsh agents do not learn to use an
ungrounded, cheap talk communication channel effectively.
Crawford & Sobel (1982) ﬁnd that in theory, the information
communicated is proportional to the amount of common
interest; thus, as agents’ interests diverge, no communication
is to be expected. And while communication can emerge
2Note that intrinsic is not a synonym ofinternal; other people
can be intrinsically motivating (Stavropoulos & Carver, 2013).
when agents are prosocial (Foerster et al., 2016; Lazaridou
et al., 2018), curious (Oudeyer & Kaplan, 2006; Oudeyer &
Smith, 2016; Forestier & Oudeyer, 2017), or hand-crafted
(Crandall et al., 2017), self-interested agents do not to learn
to communicate (Cao et al., 2018). We have shown that
the social inﬂuence reward can encourage agents to learn to
communicate more effectively in complex environments.
Our MOA is related to work on machine theory of mind
(Rabinowitz et al., 2018), which demonstrated that a model
trained to predict agents’ actions can model false beliefs.
LOLA agents model the impact of their policy on the param-
eter updates of other agents, and directly incorporate this into
the agent’s own learning rule (Foerster et al., 2018).
Barton et al. (2018) propose causal inﬂuence as a way to mea-
sure coordination between agents, speciﬁcally using Con-
vergence Cross Mapping (CCM) to analyze the degree of
dependence between two agents’ policies. The limitation
if CCM is that estimates of causality are known to degrade
in the presence of stochastic effects (Tajima et al., 2015).
Counterfactual reasoning has also been used in a multi-agent
setting, to marginalize out the effect of one agent on a pre-
dicted global value function estimating collective reward, and
thus obtain an improved baseline for computing each agent’s
advantage function (Foerster et al., 2017). A similar paper
shows that counterfactuals can be used with potential-based
reward shaping to improve credit assignment for training a
joint policy in multi-agent RL (Devlin et al., 2014). However,
once again these approaches rely on a centralized controller.
Mutual information (MI) has been explored as a tool for de-
signing social rewards. Strouse et al. (2018) train agents to
optimize the MI between their actions and a categorical goal,
as a way to signal or hide the agent’s intentions. However, this
approach depends on agents pursuing a known, categorical
goal. Guckelsberger et al. (2018), in pursuit of the ultimate
video game adversary, develop an agent that maximizes its
empowerment, minimizes the player’s empowerment, and
maximizes its empowerment over the player’s next state.
This third goal, termedtransfer empowerment, is obtained
by maximizing the MI between the agent’s actions and the
player’s future state. While a social form of empowerment,
the authors ﬁnd that agents trained with transfer empower-
ment simply tend to stay near the player. Further, the agents
are not trained with RL, but rather analytically compute these
measures in simple grid-world environments. As such, the
agent cannot learn to model other agents or the environment.
Given the social inﬂuence reward incentivizes maximizing
the mutual information between agents’ actions, our work
also has ties to the literature on empowerment, in which
agents maximize the mutual information between their ac-
tions and their future state (Klyubin et al., 2005; Mohamed &
Rezende, 2015). Thus, our proposed reward can be seen as a
novel social form of empowerment.

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
Social Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL
8. Details on Causal Inference
The causal inﬂuence reward presented in Eq. 1 is assessed
using counterfactual reasoning. Unlike ado-calculus inter-
vention (which estimates the general expected causal effect
of one variable on another), a counterfactual involves condi-
tioning on a set of variables observed in a given situation and
asking how would the outcome have changed if some vari-
able were different, and all other variables remained the same
(Pearl et al., 2016). This type of inquiry allows us to measure
the precise causal effect of agentk’s action at timestept,ak
t ,
on agentj’s action,aj
t, in the speciﬁc environment statest,
providing a richer and less sparse reward for agentk. Com-
puting counterfactuals requires conditioning on the correct
set of observed variables to ensure there are no confounds.
In our case, the conditioning set must include not only an
agent’s partially observed view of the environment state,sj
t,
but also the agent’s internal LSTM stateuj
t, to remove any
dependency on previous timesteps in the trajectory. Thus, the
basic causal inﬂuence reward can be more accurately written:
ck
t =
N∑
j=0,j̸=k
[
DKL [p(aj
t|ak
t,sj
t,uj
t )||p(aj
t|sj
t,uj
t )]
]
. (3)
Figure 8 shows the causal diagrams for computing the inﬂu-
ence reward in both the basic case (8a) and the MOA case (8b).
Because basic inﬂuence looks at inﬂuence between agents’
actions in the same timestep, the diagram is much simpler.
However, to avoid circular dependencies in the graph, it re-
quires that agentk choose its action beforej, and therefore
k can inﬂuence j butj cannot inﬂuence k. If there are more
than two agents, we assume a disjoint set of inﬂuencer and
inﬂuencee agents, and all inﬂuencers must act ﬁrst.
(a) Basic
 (b) MOA
Figure 8: Causal diagrams of agentk’s effect onj’s action.
Shaded nodes are conditioned on, and we intervene onak
t
(blue node) by replacing it with counterfactuals. Nodes with a
green background must be modeled using the MOA module.
Computing inﬂuence across timesteps, as in the communica-
tion and MOA experiments, complicates the causal diagram,
but ensures that each agent can inﬂuence every other agent.
Figure 8b shows the diagram in the MOA case, in which we
can isolate the causal effect ofak
t onaj
t+1 because the back-
door path throughst is blocked by the collider nodes atst+1
anduj
t+1 (Pearl et al., 2016). Note that it would be sufﬁcient
to condition only onsk
t in order to block all back-door paths
in this case, but we show⟨uk
t,sk
t,aj
t⟩ as shaded because all of
these are given as inputs to the MOA to help it predictaj
t+1.
For the MOA to accurately estimatep(aj
t+1|ak
t,sk
t ), it must
model both the environment transition functionT , as well as
aspects of the internal LSTM state of the other agent,uj
t+1,
as shown by the shaded green variables in Figure 8b.
This is a simple case of counterfactual reasoning, that does
not require using abduction to update the probability of any
unobserved variables (Pearl, 2013). This is because we have
built all relevant models, know all of their inputs, and can
easily store the values for those variables at every step of the
trajectory in order to condition on them so that there are no
unobserved variables that could act as a confounder.
9. Conclusions and Future Work
All three experiments have shown that the proposed intrinsic
social inﬂuence reward consistently leads to higher collec-
tive return. Despite variation in the tasks, hyper-parameters,
neural network architectures and experimental setups, the
learning curves for agents trained with the inﬂuence reward
are signiﬁcantly better than the curves of powerful agents
such as A3C and their improved baselines. In some cases,
it is clear that inﬂuence is essential to achieve any form of
learning, attesting to the promise of this idea and highlight-
ing the complexity of learning general deep neural network
multi-agent policies.
Experiment I also showed that the inﬂuence reward can lead
to the emergence of communication protocols. In experiment
II, which included an explicit communication channel, we
saw that inﬂuence improved communication. Experiment
III showed that inﬂuence can be computed by augmenting
agents with an internal model of other agents. The inﬂu-
ence reward can thus be computed without having access to
another agent’s reward function, or requiring a centralized
controller. We were able to surpass state-of-the-art perfor-
mance on the SSDs studied here, despite the fact that previous
work relied on agents’ ability to view other agents’ rewards.
Using counterfactuals to allow agents to understand the ef-
fects of their actions on others is a promising approach with
many extensions. Agents could use counterfactuals to de-
velop a form of ‘empathy’, by simulating how their actions
affect another agent’s value function. Inﬂuence could also
be used to drive coordinated behavior in robots attempting to
do cooperative manipulation and control tasks. Finally, if we
view multi-agent networks as single agents, inﬂuence could
be used as a regularizer to encourage different modules of the
network to integrate information from other networks; for
example, to hopefully prevent collapse in hierarchical RL.

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
Social Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Eugene Vinitsky for his help in reproduc-
ing the SSD environments in open source to improve the
replicability of the paper. We also thank Steven Wheelwright,
Neil Rabinowitz, Thore Graepel, Alexander Novikov, Scott
Reed, Pedro Mediano, Jane Wang, Max Kleiman-Weiner, An-
drea Tacchetti, Kevin McKee, Yannick Schroecker, Matthias
Bauer, David Rolnick, Francis Song, David Budden, and
Csaba Szepesvari, as well as everyone on the DeepMind
Machine Learning and Multi-Agent teams for their helpful
discussions and support.
References
Barton, S. L., Waytowich, N. R., Zaroukian, E., and
Asher, D. E. Measuring collaborative emergent behav-
ior in multi-agent reinforcement learning.arXiv preprint
arXiv:1807.08663, 2018.
Bogin, B., Geva, M., and Berant, J. Emergence of commu-
nication in an interactive world with consistent speakers.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.00549, 2018.
Cao, K., Lazaridou, A., Lanctot, M., Leibo, J. Z., Tuyls, K.,
and Clark, S. Emergent communication through negotia-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.03980, 2018.
Choi, E., Lazaridou, A., and de Freitas, N. Compositional
obverter communication learning from raw visual input.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.02341, 2018.
Crandall, J. W., Oudah, M., Chenlinangjia, T., Ishowo-
Oloko, F., Abdallah, S., Bonnefon, J., Cebri´an, M., Shar-
iff, A., Goodrich, M. A., and Rahwan, I. Cooperating
with machines. CoRR, abs/1703.06207, 2017. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/1703.06207.
Crawford, V . P. and Sobel, J. Strategic information transmis-
sion. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society,
pp. 1431–1451, 1982.
Devlin, S., Yliniemi, L., Kudenko, D., and Tumer, K.
Potential-based difference rewards for multiagent rein-
forcement learning. In Proceedings of the 2014 interna-
tional conference on Autonomous agents and multi-agent
systems, pp. 165–172. International Foundation for Au-
tonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2014.
Ferguson, H. J., Scheepers, C., and Sanford, A. J. Ex-
pectations in counterfactual and theory of mind reason-
ing. Language and Cognitive Processes, 25(3):297–346,
2010. doi: 10.1080/01690960903041174. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1080/01690960903041174.
Foerster, J., Assael, I. A., de Freitas, N., and Whiteson, S.
Learning to communicate with deep multi-agent reinforce-
ment learning. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, pp. 2137–2145, 2016.
Foerster, J., Farquhar, G., Afouras, T., Nardelli, N., and
Whiteson, S. Counterfactual multi-agent policy gradients.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.08926, 2017.
Foerster, J., Chen, R. Y ., Al-Shedivat, M., Whiteson, S.,
Abbeel, P., and Mordatch, I. Learning with opponent-
learning awareness. In Proceedings of the 17th Interna-
tional Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent
Systems, pp. 122–130. International Foundation for Au-
tonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2018.
Forestier, S. and Oudeyer, P.-Y . A uniﬁed model of speech
and tool use early development. In 39th Annual Con-
ference of the Cognitive Science Society (CogSci 2017),
2017.
Gers, F. A., Schmidhuber, J., and Cummins, F. Learning to
forget: Continual prediction with lstm. 1999.
Guckelsberger, C., Salge, C., and Togelius, J. New
and surprising ways to be mean. adversarial npcs with
coupled empowerment minimisation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.01387, 2018.
Harari, Y . N.Sapiens: A brief history of humankind. Random
House, 2014.
Henrich, J. The Secret of Our Success: How culture is driving
human evolution, domesticating our species, and making
us smart. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2015.
URL http://press.princeton.edu/titles/
10543.html.
Herrmann, E., Call, J., Hern `andez-Lloreda, M. V ., Hare,
B., and Tomasello, M. Humans have evolved spe-
cialized skills of social cognition: The cultural intel-
ligence hypothesis. Science, 317(5843):1360–1366,
2007. ISSN 0036-8075. doi: 10.1126/science.
1146282. URL http://science.sciencemag.
org/content/317/5843/1360.
Hughes, E., Leibo, J. Z., Phillips, M. G., Tuyls, K., Du´e˜nez-
Guzm´an, E. A., Casta ˜neda, A. G., Dunning, I., Zhu, T.,
McKee, K. R., Koster, R., et al. Inequity aversion improves
cooperation in intertemporal social dilemmas. InAdvances
in neural information processing systems (NIPS), Mon-
treal, Canada, 2018.
Klyubin, A. S., Polani, D., and Nehaniv, C. L. Empowerment:
A universal agent-centric measure of control. In Evolu-
tionary Computation, 2005. The 2005 IEEE Congress on,
volume 1, pp. 128–135. IEEE, 2005.
Laland, K. N. Darwin’s unﬁnished symphony : how cul-
ture made the human mind / Kevin N. Laland. Princeton

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
Social Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL
University Press Princeton, 2017. ISBN 9781400884872
140088487.
Lazaridou, A., Hermann, K. M., Tuyls, K., and Clark, S.
Emergence of linguistic communication from referential
games with symbolic and pixel input. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1804.03984, 2018.
Leibo, J. Z., Zambaldi, V ., Lanctot, M., Marecki, J., and Grae-
pel, T. Multi-agent reinforcement learning in sequential
social dilemmas. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference
on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, pp. 464–
473. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and
Multiagent Systems, 2017.
Liu, B., Singh, S., Lewis, R. L., and Qin, S. Optimal rewards
for cooperative agents.IEEE Transactions on Autonomous
Mental Development, 6(4):286–297, 2014.
Lowe, R., Wu, Y ., Tamar, A., Harb, J., Abbeel, O. P., and Mor-
datch, I. Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-
competitive environments. In Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, pp. 6379–6390, 2017.
Mnih, V ., Badia, A. P., Mirza, M., Graves, A., Lillicrap, T.,
Harley, T., Silver, D., and Kavukcuoglu, K. Asynchronous
methods for deep reinforcement learning. InInternational
conference on machine learning, pp. 1928–1937, 2016.
Mohamed, S. and Rezende, D. J. Variational information
maximisation for intrinsically motivated reinforcement
learning. In Advances in neural information processing
systems, pp. 2125–2133, 2015.
Oudeyer, P.-Y . and Kaplan, F. Discovering communication.
Connection Science, 18(2):189–206, 2006.
Oudeyer, P.-Y . and Smith, L. B. How evolution may work
through curiosity-driven developmental process.Topics
in Cognitive Science, 8(2):492–502, 2016.
Pathak, D., Agrawal, P., Efros, A. A., and Darrell, T.
Curiosity-driven exploration by self-supervised predic-
tion. In International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML), volume 2017, 2017.
Pearl, J. Structural counterfactuals: A brief introduction.
Cognitive science, 37(6):977–985, 2013.
Pearl, J., Glymour, M., and Jewell, N. P.Causal inference in
statistics: a primer. John Wiley & Sons, 2016.
Peysakhovich, A. and Lerer, A. Consequentialist conditional
cooperation in social dilemmas with imperfect informa-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.06975, 2017.
Peysakhovich, A. and Lerer, A. Prosocial learning agents
solve generalized stag hunts better than selﬁsh ones. In
Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Au-
tonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, pp. 2043–2044.
International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and
Multiagent Systems, 2018.
Rabinowitz, N. C., Perbet, F., Song, H. F., Zhang, C., Eslami,
S., and Botvinick, M. Machine theory of mind. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1802.07740, 2018.
Schmidhuber, J. Formal theory of creativity, fun, and in-
trinsic motivation (1990–2010). IEEE Transactions on
Autonomous Mental Development, 2(3):230–247, 2010.
Sequeira, P., Melo, F. S., Prada, R., and Paiva, A. Emerging
social awareness: Exploring intrinsic motivation in mul-
tiagent learning. In Development and Learning (ICDL),
2011 IEEE International Conference on, volume 2, pp.
1–6. IEEE, 2011.
Singh, S. P., Barto, A. G., and Chentanez, N. Intrinsically
motivated reinforcement learning. InAdvances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 17 [Neural Information
Processing Systems, NIPS 2004, December 13-18, 2004,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada], pp. 1281–1288,
2004.
Stavropoulos, K. K. and Carver, L. J. Research review: social
motivation and oxytocin in autism–implications for joint
attention development and intervention.Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 54(6):603–618, 2013.
Strouse, D., Kleiman-Weiner, M., Tenenbaum, J., Botvinick,
M., and Schwab, D. Learning to share and hide inten-
tions using information regularization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1808.02093, 2018.
Tajima, S., Yanagawa, T., Fujii, N., and Toyoizumi, T.
Untangling brain-wide dynamics in consciousness by
cross-embedding. PLoS computational biology, 11(11):
e1004537, 2015.
Tomasello, M. Why we cooperate. MIT press, 2009.
van Schaik, C. P. and Burkart, J. M. Social learning and evo-
lution: the cultural intelligence hypothesis. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,
366(1567):1008–1016, 2011.
von Frisch, K. The dance language and orientation of bees.
5, 06 1969.
Yu, C., Zhang, M., and Ren, F. Emotional multiagent rein-
forcement learning in social dilemmas. InInternational
Conference on Principles and Practice of Multi-Agent
Systems, pp. 372–387. Springer, 2013.